 Chapter 14 This silver leak was a clever scheme. The British mines, which in my day were guarded so cautiously by the army, had apparently been tapped off as neatly as those illegal standpipes plugged in by private citizens all along the Claudian aqueduct. Silver bars sparkling all the way to Rome like the crystal waters of the Cyrillian spring. I wished Petro and I had done it ten years before. Passing the Capena Gate lock-up, I nipped in to see the loafers from the cook-shop whom I'd seen being arrested that morning for spying on the senator. I was out of luck. Pertinax had let them go. No evidence to hold them, he maintained. I gazed at the duty-guard with my world-weary fellow-comrade sigh. Typical. Did he bother to question them? A few friendly words. Brilliant. What about this Pertinax? Knows it all, the squad he complained. We were both acquainted with the type. We exchanged a painful look. Is he just inefficient, or would you say it was something else? I'd say I don't like him, but I say that about them all. I grinned. Thank you. Look, I cajoled, frankly. What's the word on an ingot of government lead? This is unofficially official, if you understand what I mean. This was a lark. I didn't understand what I was saying myself. He insisted he was under strict orders to say nothing. I chinked some coinage his way. Never fails. A drayman handed it in last week, turned up hoping for a reward. The magistrate himself came down to look. The drayman lives, another magic chink, in a river booth on the Trans-Siberina bank, at the sign of the turbot, near the Sulpician Bridge. I found the booth, but not the drayman. Three days after his horse stumbled over the silver pig in the dark, he was dredged out of the tiber by two men fishing from a raft. They took him to Tiber Island, the medical hospice at the temple of Iscalapis. Most of their patients die, but it didn't worry the drayman. He was already dead. Before leaving the island, I leaned on the parapet of the old Fabrician Bridge and did some hard thinking. Someone approached in that all too casual way, the way that is never casual at all. New Falco? Who wants to know, Princess? My name's Astia. You asking about the man who was drowned? I guessed Astia was the drayman's floozy. She was a thin, bleached waterfront shrimp with a tired, hard waterfront face. Best to know where you are. You his woman? I asked her straight out. Astia laughed bitterly. Not any longer. You were the Praetorians? She spat at me. I played down my astonishment. Life's too short. I waited after that. It was the only thing to do, since I had no idea what I was waiting for. She seemed to consider whether I could be trusted, then after a moment, out it spilled. I came here afterwards. I didn't care about him. I only wanted information. Tell him anything? What do you think? He was good to me when he had any money. I went to the temple. I buried him myself. Falco, he may have been found in the river, but I know he didn't drown. They told me at the temple he must have tipped him when he was drunk. But when he was drunk— That was probably quite often, but I had more tact than to ask. He used to lie down in the cart and let the horse walk him home. Anyone find the cart? Left in the cattle market for him, minus the horse. Hmm. What did the guards want, Princess? He found something valuable. He wouldn't tell me what, but it frightened him. He handed it in at the nearest lock-up instead of selling it himself. The guards knew he found it. They didn't know what he'd done with it. So it was not the guards who snatched young Sasha. Unlikely, anyway. She'd not have escaped so easily. She might never have escaped at all. I'll have to speak to them. Any chance of a name? Astia knew very little. Their captain, she told me, was called Julius Frontinus. As a member of an elite regiment, he undoubtedly possessed the full three names of a substantial man. But two were enough for me to pin him down. For the first time in my life, I volunteered to face an interview with the Emperor's Praetorian guards.