 Chapter 19 I went to the funeral. In my line of work, this is traditional. Petronius came with me. According to custom, they conducted the ceremony out of doors. They came in procession from her father's house, bringing Sasha Kamelina in an open beer with garlands in her hair. The cremation took place outside the city, near the family mausoleum on the Appian Way. They dispensed with professional mourners. Young men who were friends of the family carried her funeral bed. There was a blustery wind. They brought her through Rome in daylight, with flute music and lamentation disrupting the city streets. At the pire, built of untrimmed wood like an altar and with dark leaves woven round the sides, one of the young bearers stumbled. I stepped forward to help without looking. The beer was so light it nearly flew from our hands as we swung it up. Her father's oration was short, almost perfunctory. That seemed right. So too had been her life. What Publius Camillus said that day was simple and simply the truth. This was my only daughter, Sasha Kamelina. She was fair, reverent and dutiful. Snatched from the world before she could know the love of her husband or child. Receive her young soul gently, oh ye gods. He seized one of the torches and with formerly averted gaze, he lit the pire. Sasha Kamelina, hail and farewell. Surrounded by flowers, small trinkets, sweet oils, she left us. People wept. I was one of them. Scented flames crackled up. I glimpsed her once through the smoke. She was gone. Petronius and I had endured the respectful ritual scores of times. We never liked it. I raged under my breath as we stood to one side. This is obscene. Remind me again what in Hades I'm doing here. He answered in his low voice, lecturing me to steady me. Official sympathy. Plus a forlorn hope that the maniac we're looking for may turn up too. Fascinated by his crime, flaunting his mad mask at the mausoleum. Keeping on my funeral face, I scoffed, exposing himself to curious scrutiny in the one place where he knows uncomfortable law agents are standing about. Just longing for a chance to gallop after any other man. Petro dropped a hand on my arm. Then again, you know, we may spot a mood in the family that doesn't fit. We can rule out the family, I declared. Petronius raised an eyebrow. He'd left this delicate issue to the preta. Let a magistrate of their own rank plant his nice clean shoe in the manure. I think he assumed I was a little too much of a wimp. Let a magistrate of their own rank plant his nice clean shoe in the manure. I think he assumed I was too broken-hearted to consider it, but I had. Women not strong enough, children not tall enough. Decimus Verus has 50 members of the government, whose word I don't rate a bean, and the old slave from the Black Sea who cleans his boots, who's good enough for me, to swear he was at the Senate. While Publis Mato was discussing merchant ships with his brother's daughter's divorced husband, which, incidentally, Petro, has ruled out the ex-husband too, before we even bother to rule him in. I'd checked. I knew the whereabouts of relations the senator and his brother had forgotten they ever owned. The only thing I had not done was to meet Helena Justina's ex-husband. Never even trouble to ask his name. I excused him for two reasons. The useful Black Sea boot slave had told me where he was, and anyway, Helena's husband had got himself divorced. I'd seen enough of other people's marriages to believe that the parties concerned were usually best off when they put an end to their formal union. If Helena's husband agreed with me, he was obviously a reasonable sort of man. Do not imagine my stalwart old tent-mate stayed idle. Petronius had planted himself on the local praetor's staff. He made himself indispensable to the idyll on the case. Happily not Pertinax here. We were in sector 8, the Roman Forum district now. Petro himself led a search through every store and hovel in that lane. It turned out the warehouse where Soscia was found belonged to an ancient ex-consul called Caprinius Marcellus, who was dying of some slow malady on a country estate 50 miles south of Rome. The praetor would have accepted that dying was an alibi, but Petronius still traveled the distance and back to make sure. He could not be Caprinius Marcellus. He was in too much pain even to see Petro standing beside his bed. The warehouse was empty when we found it, but we were certain it had been used. There were recent wagon rats in the yard. Anyone who knew the owner was ill could have secretly moved in, yet apparently they moved out afterwards. There were no incidents at the funeral. We recognized no villains. Petronius and I were the people who felt out of place. By now the close family were waiting to gather the ashes. It was time for other mourners to depart. Before we left, I forced myself to approach Soscia Camilina's bereaved papa. Publius Camilis Mato It was the first time I'd seen him since that day with Pertinax. He was a man you forget, the smooth oval face that carried so little expression, the remote gaze with a hint of justified contempt. This was almost the only occasion too when I saw him with his brother. Publius seemed older with that bald head, but today it was covered while he officiated here, and as he turned to avoid me, I noticed a handsome, decisive cast to his profile which my man Decimus lacked. When he moved off, he left a faint haze of myrrh, and he wore a gold intaglio ring with a substantial emerald, slight touches of bachelor vanity which I'd missed before. Noticing these things, which were so unimportant, added to my awkwardness. Sir, I expect this is the last thing you want to hear from me. I could see from his expression that I was right. Sir, I promise you, as I promise her, I will find out who killed your child, whatever it costs, and however long it takes. He stared at me as though he'd forgotten how to speak. Julia Justa, his brother's wife, briefly touched my arm. She flashed an irritated glance at me, but I stood me ground. Publius was a man whose grief caught him smiling gently, but the gentleness only hid a hardness I'd never seen before. You have done quite enough for my daughter, he exclaimed. Take yourself off! Leave us alone! I'm not going to let you go. I'm not going to let you go. I'm not going to let you go. I'm not going to let you go. I'm not going to let you go. I'm not going to let you go. I'm not going to let you go. Take yourself off! Leave us all alone! His clipped voice rose nearly to a shout. It jarred. Well, the star of the morning had dimmed for us both, and here was I, battering him. He knew no one else to blame. The man blamed me. Yet that was not the reason. It jarred because Publius Camillus Mato looked like someone whom grief steers into rigid self-control. Like a man who would break, but not yet. Break, but not in public. Not today. Not here. He'd previously been so persuasive. This loss had shaken him. I mourned his vibrant child as honestly as he. For her sake, I ached for him. For her sake, I addressed him with an open heart. Sir, we share... We share nothing, Falco! He strode away. I watched the senator's pale wife, who'd taken it on herself to guide her husband's brother through this appalling day, lead him towards the pyre. Servants were scooping up the smaller children. Family slaves huddled together. Important men, about to leave, clasped the senator's hand and followed his brother with sombre eyes. I knew I could make contact with the senator. With his younger brother, Publius, I was grasping his hand. But Decimus and I could always talk. I waited. The two brothers had shared Sasha's life. They were sharing her departure. Decimus was presiding now. Publius would only stare at those threads of bone on the pyre. While Sasha's father stood apart, alone, it was her uncle who prepared to pour the wine to douse the embers. On this queue, Moura's brother, who was a little boy, was standing by the pyre. As soon as the two Mouras were moving off, Decimus paused in his task, waiting for privacy. In the manner of a man at a funeral going through the polite motions of permitting strangers to present condolences, Decimus walked over to Petronius Longus, beaten to fishaldom. Three paces from us, the senator spoke in a heavy voice, his weariness clove to mine. Watch, Captain. Thank you for coming. Didius Falco, tell me if you're willing to go on with the case. No fuss, no reference to me severing our contract, no escape. I answered with real bitterness. I'll go on. The magistrate's team have run into the ground. There was nothing in the warehouses. Nobody saw the man, nothing to identify his pen. But the silver pigs will lead us to him in the end. What will you do? the senator asked, frowning. I sensed Petronius shift his weight. We'd not discussed it. Until that moment, I'd been unsure. She was gone now. My mind cleared. There was an obvious course, and there was nothing for me in Rome. No place, no pleasure, no peace. Sir, Rome's too big, but our thread starts in one small community in a province under strict army control. Hiding knots out there must be much more difficult. We've been fools. I should have gone before. Petro, who had hated the place so dismally, could no longer keep quiet. Oh, Marcus, dear gods! Britain, I confirmed. Britain, in winter. It was already October. I'd be lucky to get there before the sea passages closed. Britain, in winter. I'd been there, so I knew how bad it was. The fine mist that tangles sticky as fish glue in your hair, the cold that leaps straight into your shoulders and knees, the sea fogs and hill blizzards, the dreadful dark months when dawn and evening seem hardly separate. It did not matter. None of that mattered to me. The more uncivilized, the better. Nothing mattered anymore.