 Chapter 18 Darkness, flares, the patrol waiting for the magistrate. They coped with strangled prostitutes and fishwives batted with staves, but this touched the Senate. No worse to solve but menacing paperwork. Petronius groaned in despair. We wasted hours searching, squeezed the throats of a trail of pimps who'd watched her, found the lane, batted five different watchmen before we identified the place. Too late. Nothing I could do. Just nothing I could do. This damn city. He loved Rome. They laid her down in the yard. It's usually easy to maintain some detachment at this point. I rarely know the victim. I don't meet the victim until after the crime. That order of events is what I recommend. I covered my face. I was aware of Petronius long as dragging back his men. We'd been colleagues for a long time. We fought life from the same side. He granted me as much leeway as he could. I stood a yard from her. Petronius came to my shoulder. He muttered. Crouching, his big hand softly closed her eyes. He stood by me again. We were both looking down at her. He was looking at Sasha to avoid looking at me. I was looking at Sasha because there was nothing else on this earth that I ever wanted to look at again. Her sweet face was still bright with a flim-flammery a young woman of her station paints on. Beneath, her skin tones were stone-white as alabaster. It was her. Yet it would never be her. There was no light and no laughter, only a motionless, eggshell-white case. It was a corpse. Yet I could not deal with it as a corpse. She can't have realized, Petro murmured. He cleared his throat. That was all. No nasty work. Rape. He meant rape, torture, indignity, indecency. She was dead and this poor fool was trying to tell me she'd not been terrorized. I wanted to rage at him that nothing else mattered. He was trying to tell me it was quick. I could see that. One short, hard, violent upward blow had killed Sasha Canelina before she guessed what the man would do. There was very little blood. She died of shock. What she did when you arrived, I asked. Did she say anything? Routine questions, Marcus. Clean to your routine. Pointless even to ask. Petronius shrugged helplessly, then moved away. So I stood there and was as nearly alone with Sasha as I would ever be again. I wanted to hold her in my arms, but there were too many people. After a while I just dropped down on my heels and stayed with her while Petro kept his squaddies at rest. I could not speak to her, not even in my head. I no longer really looked at her, lest the sluggish wake of her spilt blood should defeat me. I sat there, living through what must have happened. It was the nearest I could come to helping her. It was the only way I could comfort her for dying so alone. I know who it was. He must realize that. One day, however carefully he protects himself, the man will answer to me. She found him there, writing, that was evident. Writing what? Not a tally of the silver bars, for she was wrong. There were no bars, though we turned the deserted warehouse over for days. But he was writing, because a lamp black from the wet ink stained her white dress around the wound. Perhaps she knew him. When she found him, he realized she needed to be silenced, so he stood up and rapidly stabbed her, a rising blow through the heart, once, with his pen. Petronius was right. Sasha Kamelina could not have expected that. I rose. I managed neither to stumble nor to break down. Her father. I'll tell him, stated Petronius drably, a task he so hated. Go home. I'll tell the family. Marcus just go home. I decided after all to let him tell him. I could feel his eyes watching me as I walked away. He wanted to help. He knew there was nothing anyone could do.