 Blackstone Audio presents The Silver Pigs, a Marcus Didier's Falco mystery by Lindsay Davis. This book is read by Christian Rodzka. Part 1 Rome Summer to Autumn AD 70 Chapter 1 When a girl came rushing up the steps, I decided she was wearing far too many clothes. It was late summer, Rome frizzled like a pancake on a griddle plate. People unlaced their shoes, but had to keep them on. Not even an elephant could cross the streets unshotted. People flopped on stools and shadowed doorways bare knees apart, naked to the waist, and in the back streets of the Aventine sector where I lived, that was just the women. I was standing in the forum. She was running. She looked overdressed and dangerously hot, but some stroke or suffocation had not yet finished her off. She was shining and sticky as a glazed pastry-plat, and when she heard up the steps of the temple of Saturn straight towards me, I made no attempt to move aside. She missed me. Just. Some men are born lucky. Others are called Didier's Falco. Close at hand I still thought she'd be better off without some many tunics. Oh, don't misunderstand me. I like men women in a few whips of drapery. Then I can hope for a chance to remove the whips. If they start out with nothing I tend to get depressed because either they've just stripped off for someone else or, in my line of work, they're usually dead. This one was vibrantly alive. Perhaps in a fine mansion with marble veneers, fountains, garden-court-yards deep in shade, a leisureed young lady might keep cool, even swaddled in embroidered finery with jet and amber bangles from her elbow to her wrist. If she ran out in a hurry, she would instantly regret it. The heat-aise would melt her. Those light robes would stick to all the lines of her slim figure. That clean hair would cling in tantalizing tendrils against her neck. Her feet would slip against the wet souls of her sandals, runnels of sweat dash her warm throat into interesting crevices under all that fancy bodice work. Excuse me, she garr'd. Excuse me. She veered around me. I sidestepped politely. She dodged. I dodged. I'd come to the forum to visit my banker. I felt glum. I greeted this smoldering apparition with a keenness of a man who needs troubles taking off his mind. She was a slight thing. I liked them tall, but that was prepared to compromise. She was wickedly young. At the time I lusted after older women, but this one would grow up, and I could certainly wait. While we sashayed on the steps she glanced back panic struck. I admired her shapely shoulder, then squinted over it himself. Then I had a shock. There were two of them. Two ugly lumps of jail fodder, jelly-brained and broad as they were high, were pushing through the crowds towards her, just ten paces off. The little lass was obviously terrified. Get out of my way! She pleaded. I wonder what to do. Man, as I chided thoughtfully as the jelly-brains came within five paces, get out of my way, sir! She roared. She was perfect. It was the usual scene in the forum. We had the record office and Capitol Hill hard above us on the left, to the right, the courts, and the temple of Castor further down the sacred way. Opposite, beyond the white marble-rosstrom, stood the Senate House. All the porticos were crammed with butchers and bankers, all the open spaces filled with sweaty crowds, mainly men. The piazza rang with the curses of strings of slaves, criss-crossing like a badly organized military display. The air simmered with a wreak of garlic and hair per mud. The girl pranced to one side. I slid the same way. Need directions young lady, I asked helpfully. She was too desperate to pretend. I need a district magistrate! Three paces, options fast-running app. Her face changed. Oh, help me! My pleasure. I took charge. I hooked her way by one arm as the first of the jelly-brains lunged. Close to, they looked even larger, and the forum was not an area where I could count on any support. I planned at the soul of my boot on the first leg's breastbone, then vigorously straight in my knee. I felt my leg crunch, but the draft-ox staggered into his evil friend so they teeted backwards like faltering acrobats. I looked around frantically for a diversion to cause. The steps were crowded with the usual illegal touts and overpriced market stalls. I considered upending some melons, but smashed fruit meant a diminished livelihood for their market-gardener. I had a diminished livelihood myself, so I settled on the tasteful copperware. Tilting it with my shoulder, I keeled over a complete stall. The stall-holders' thin cry was lost as bouncing flaggons, ures, and urns, sped at a denting pace down the temple steps, followed by the despairing owner, and numbers of righteous passes by, all hoping to stroll home with a nice new fluted fruit bowl under one arm. I grabbed the girl and head up the temple steps, scarcely pausing to admire the dignified beauty of the ionic portico, I pulled her through the six columns and into the inner sanctum. She squeaked, I kept going at speed. It was cool enough to make a shiver and dark enough to make me sweat. There was an old, old smell. Our footsteps rang fast and sharp on the ancient stone floor. Am I allowed in here? She hissed. Look, Pious, we're on our way. But we can't get out! If you know anything about temples, you'll realize they have a single, imposing entrance at the front. If you know anything about priests, you'll have noticed they usually have a discreet little door for themselves somewhere at the back. The priests of Saturn did not disappoint us. I brought her out on the race-course side and set off south. The poor girl had wriggled out of the arena straight into a lion pit. I can't hit her through dark alleys and pungent back doubles to home ground. Where ever are we? Aventine sector, 13th district, south of the circus maximus heading for the Ostea Road. As reassuring as a shark's grin to a flounder. She'd been worn about places like this. If a loving old nurse knew what they were doing, she'd been worn about fellows like me. I slowed down after we crossed the Orelian Way, partly because I was on secure home ground, but also because the girl was ready to expire. Where are we going? My office. She looked relieved. Not for long. My office was two rooms on the sixth floor of a dank tenement where only the dirt and dead bedbugs were cementing together the walls. Before any of my neighbours could price up her clothing, I wheeled her off the mud track the pus for a high road and into leniers distinctly low-class laundry. Hearing the voice of smirked as my landlord, we wheeled smartly back out.