 Chapter 16 I went back to see the senator next day. After my party with Frontinus, it was an afternoon call. Let's submit details of my morning. Most of it was spent in bed, though there were spasms of painful activity from time to time. When I arrived at his house, the senator had mild indigestion after lunch. I had severe indigestion, though I'd not been able to face lunch. I stormed in. He was beginning to judge my moods by the suddenness of my arrival in his sanctuary. Today I popped up like a playwright's villain, cackling with malice which I was eager to share with an audience. Camillus Verus had the goodness to set aside his paperwork and let me spout my colorful spume. No silver bars, but I stubbed my toe on quite a plot. You lied to me, sir. than a secore at the Temple of Isis, to much less good purpose, but just as expertly told. Falco, can I explain? No. He owed me a rant, at least. My violent excitement held him mesmerized. Spare me, senator. I don't touch political work. I don't rate the risk. My mother gave one son to Vespasian in Galilee. I'm her only survivor, and surviving suits me fine. He looked touchy. He considered I was belittling the political aspects. Since I considered he was, we were draftsmen in stalemate. You'll see Vespasian assassinated. Oh, Falco, plunge the country back into civil war. Ruin the empire? More fighting, more uncertainty, more Roman blood spilled on Roman streets? Whoever paid heavy salaries to protect the emperor, I rasped, I'm paid with lies and promises. Suddenly I lost patience. There was no future for me here. They had deceived me, and they tried to use me. Cleverer men than this had mistaken me for a country clown in a farce. Cleverer men had discovered the mistake. More quietly, I brought the ridiculous piece of theatre to an end. Vespasian doesn't like informers. I don't like emperors. I thought I liked you, but any poor spat out of his depth can make a mistake. Good day, sir. I stormed out again. He let me go. I'd noticed before Decimus Camillus Verus was a shrewd man. I was striding angrily across the hall with its spluttery fountain when I heard a hiss. Falco! It was Sasha. Come into the garden. And talk. It would have been incorrect to gossip with the young lady of the house, even if I'd remained in her uncle's employ. I'd try not to upset senators by meddling with their wards in their own front halls where the servants see everything that goes on. If I spoke to Sasha at all, which I must do now since her noble personage had spoken to me, any chat must be quick, and we should stay in the hall. I scuffed the marble floor tiles with my heel. Oh, diddius Falco, please! From sheer spite I followed her. She led me to an internal courtyard I'd not seen before. Clearing white stonework fought the cold black green of clipped cypress trees. There were cooing doves and a bigger fountain, which worked. A peacock screeched behind one of the lichen-covered urns, which were planted with stately white lilies. It was a cool, pretty, quiet place, but I refused to sink into the shade under the pergola and be soothed. Sasha sat. I faced her on my feet with my arms folded. In some ways this was just as well. However much I was tempted to slide an arm around her, I denied myself the chance. She was wearing a red dress hemmed with damson braid. It emphasized the paleness of her skin beneath the artificial colors she applied. Leaning towards me with a pinched and troubled face, she was for a moment a one little creature. She seemed apologetic on behalf of her family, though as she tried to win me over she became more earnest than I'd ever seen her. Somebody at some time had taught her how to stand at ground. I overheard. Falko, you can't let Vespasian be murdered. He's going to be a good emperor. I doubt it, I said. He's not cruel. He's not mad. He leads a simple life. He works hard. He's old, but he has a gifted son. This came out with spirit. She believed it, though I knew such a theory could not originate with her. I was surprised to find the emperor could claim such support, for he lacked all the traditional advantages. None of Vespasian's family had ever held high office. I did not blame him for that. Neither had any of mine. Who stuffed you with this horsehair? I raged. Helena. Helena. The cousin she'd mentioned. The senator's daughter. The one some poor sap of a husband with a great deal of luck had managed to divorce. You see. So what she liked, this Helena of yours. She's wonderful, Sasha exclaimed at once. But then she decided with equal certainty, you wouldn't like her that much. Why's that? I laughed. She shrugged. I never met her cousin, yet my instinct had been to resent the woman ever since Sasha first tried to use her name as a disguise when she'd not trust me. In fact, my only real grudge against Helena was that I could see she wielded considerable influence over Sasha Kemelina. I preferred to influence Sasha myself. I reckon Sasha was wrong anyway. I normally liked women, but if this Helena felt protective towards her younger relative, as I gathered she did, the chances were that she would not like me. I wrote to her, Sasha explained, as if she read my thoughts. I said nothing. I was leaving. There was no longer anything to say. I stood half aware of the clean sense of summer flowers and the lazy warmth beating off the stones. I tell Helena everything. I stared at her more kindly, smitten with unease. It's an odd fact. You feel more ashamed when you've nothing to answer for than when you're disguising some brazen act of scandal. Since I was still silent, Sasha continued to talk. It was her one annoying habit. She never could sit quiet. You're really going away. I won't see you again. There's something I want to say. Marcus Didius Falco. I've been wondering for days how to— She used my formal name. No one ever did that. Her respectful tone was more than I could bear. I'd stumbled into a real emergency. My anger fled. Don't! I exclaimed urgently. Sasha, believe me. When you need to spend days composing your script, the reason is, it's best to say nothing at all. She hesitated. You don't know— I was a spare-time poet. There were many things I would never know, but I recognise this. Oh, Sasha. I know. For one fantastic moment, I flashed into a dream where I took Sasha Camilina into my life. I flashed back. Only a fool tries to step across the barriers of rank in that way. A man can buy himself into the middle class or have the gold ring donated to him for services to the emperor, especially if the services are of a dubious kind. But so long as her father and her uncle knew what they were about—and her uncle must, Then even with that queer problem of having no mother to name, Sasha Camilina would be disposed of in some way to enhance her own position and their family bank account. Our two lives could never converge. At heart, she understood, for despite her brave attempt, she stared at her toes in their knotted gold sandals, biting her lip but accepting what I said. If I need you, she began in a subdued tone. I replied briskly, for my own sake. You won't. In your sweet sheltered life, you've no need of anyone like me. And Sasha Camilina, I really don't need you. I left quickly, so I should not see her face. I walked home. Rome, my city, which had been until then a never failing solace, lay before me like a woman, secretive and beautiful, demanding and rewarding, eternally seductive. For the first time in my life, I refused to be seduced.