 CHAPTER XVII I did see Sasha Kamelina again. She asked me to meet her. Of course, I went. I went as soon as I could. By then summer was nuzzling autumn's neck. The days seemed equally long and hot, but towards dusk the air began to cool more quickly. I went out to the Campania for a grape-gathering holiday, but my heart was never in it, and I came home. I'd not been able to shift the silver pigs from my mind. This puzzle had gripped my interest. No amount of raging at the way I'd been teased along by Decimus Camillus could alter that. Whenever I saw him, Petronius Longus asked after my progress. He knew how I felt, but was too enthralled for tact. I started to avoid him, which depressed me even more. In addition, the whole world was watching our new Emperor Vespasian. There was no possibility of gossiping at the barbers or the baths, the racetrack or the theatre without an awkward twinge because I could not forget what I knew. For six weeks or longer I lay low. I'd bungled divorce cases, failed to serve rits, forgot the dates of court appearances, tore ligaments at the gym, insulted my family, dodged my landlord, drank too much, ate too little, gave up women for good. If I went to the theatre, I lost the thread of the plot. Then one day, Lenia cornered me. Falco, your girlfriend's been. Out of habit I demanded which. I still like to imply I was harassed by half-naked Tripolitanian acrobats every afternoon. Lenia knew perfectly well I'd given up women. She missed the clip of their little sandals and the giggles on the stairs when I brought them in. She also missed the shrieks of indignation when the mother swept them out with the dust the next day. Little Miss Dainty with the pedigree and bangles. I let her pee in the bleach vat, then she wrote a note upstairs. I took the stairs in a rush. I reached the apartment all a-splutter with a hacking throat. My mother had been. A pile of mended tunics, a picture of a chariot drawn on a slate by my niece, a mullet in a covered dish. I flung these aside as I searched. The note was in my bedroom. An odd pang caught me to imagine Sasha there. She pegged her message on my pile of poetry under the jet bracelet that I knew. I wondered if she noticed that Aglaya, a radiant goddess, was really about her. All the girls in my odes are called Aglaya. A poet needs to protect himself. Sasha had left me a wooden tablet, unlaced from one of those four-page pocketbooks, and then inscribed deeply with a stylus in a round hand that had never done serious writing. Didius Falco, I know a place where they may keep the silver pigs. If I show you, you can claim your bonus. Will you meet me at the Golden Milestone in two hours? If you're too busy, I will go for you and see— I pounded back downstairs in a blind panic. Linear! Linear! What time was she here? They were waiting for me calmly at the foot of the last flight. Smaractus. Below me shadows moved, their bare feet noiseless on the stone steps. My landlord's gladiators after my unpaid rent. I have an arrangement with a cloakmaker who lives on the second floor that, in an emergency, I can run through his room, fling myself over the balcony onto the firefighting porch, then drop into the street. I'd passed the cloakmaker's door. I half turned back. The door opened. Someone who was not the cloakmaker came out. They were straight from smaractuses in sanitary gym and in full fighting rig. Below me, the type called Miamilons, glistening with oil above their body belts, their right arms padded and ringed with metal from collarbone to fist, their solid, high-crested helmets shaped like curling, sneering fish. Above me, when I whirled round, two light, laughing men in tunics only, but each with a fiendish net coiled on his arm. His fisherman. I whipped back. There he is, Falco! What's the rush? I recognized the one who spoke. I recognized his build. He crouched slightly, in fighting stance, faceless behind his helmet grill. I must have exclaimed, Oh no, not now, oh God, not now! Now, Falco! You can't, oh you can't! Oh, we can! Let's show the men! Then both fishers flung their nets down over my head. I knew as I struggled hopelessly in two ten-foot circles of biting cords that it was going to be much worse than being arrested by the idylles bully boys. If Smaractus was just making his point, they would tenderize me like an octopus slammed on the foreshore rocks. If he found himself a new tenant for upstairs, I was finished. It was going to be as bad as anything could be. My only comfort was that I would know very little about it once I managed to pass out, and that perhaps I would never wake up. There were probably five of them, but it seemed more. The fishers could not be seen with their spiked tridents in the open streets, but the Miamilans had brought their wooden practice swords. As I flailed in the nets, they beat me systematically until I faded in a smother of disjointed sounds. I was coming too. New tenants must be thin on the ground. Perhaps they'd heard what life in a Smaractus apartment is like. The office was mine still. I was waking up. Not in my room, somewhere else. I felt desperately tired. Pain lapped around me as thick as spilt nectar, then I swirled in a torrent of sensation and fierce noise back up from the whirlpool. He's coming round. Say something, Falco, Linear ordered. My brain uttered words. I heard no sound. My cottonball mouth never moved. I felt sorry for this, Falco, if he hurt as much as me. I'd left the world for perhaps thirty seconds, perhaps a hundred years. Wherever I'd been was better than here, and I wanted to go back. Marques! Not Linear anymore. Don't try to talk, son. Linear had sent for my mother. Good heavens. Slowly the red blurb beyond my eyeballs solidified. Slowly I and that other poor man they call Falco fused together. This is... Who said that? Me? Or Falco? Him, I think. My mother's voice, acid with relief, spoke. This is why people keep up with their rent. Linear loomed over me, her neck haggard as a giant lizard. Lie still, she said. I sat up. My mother had helped. Anything to lie down again, but her arm at my back held me upright like a puppeteer's softwood stick. My mother raised my head, holding me under the chin with a firm, neutral grip of a lifelong nurse. She treats me like a hopeless case. She speaks to me as if I were a delinquent child. The loss of my great-hearted brother burns between us like wormwood in the throat, a perpetual reproach. I don't even know what she reproaches me for. I suspect she doesn't know herself. She seemed to believe in me now. Mother said in a voice that forced sense deep into the mash that once had been my brain, saying, I'm worried about the little girl. We read her note. I sent Petronius to find her, but you ought to go. I reached the Forum in a litter, shouldered through the crowds like some gross eunuch with more money than taste. We jostled to the Golden Milestone from which all the roads in the Empire take their distance. I thought of her, waiting to meet me at the heart of the world. No sign of her now. One of Petro's troopers gave me a message to meet his captain in Knapp Lane. The man held back, still expecting someone else. I set off on foot. Hunting for the right back alley, I found some sewersmen, ferreting round a manhole as sewersmen like to do. They were working with more energy than usual. Concrete was being shoveled underground frantically, with not a wine good of refreshment inside. I addressed them with a formality of tone, a reserve for specialists. Sorry to interrupt. Have you possibly had a moment to spot Petronius Longus, the captain of the Aventine Watch? The foreman gave me the benefit of his philosophy of life. Listen, Centurion, when the great drain starts gulping the sacred way into the shit after 500 years, the navvies shoring up the culvert have better things to do than take a census at Passers By. Thank you for your trouble, I replied politely. For once, it worked. Back in the pepper warehouses, he admitted gruffly. Howl crowd of silly devils stirring up the dust. I was already halfway there, calling my thanks. There was no rush. Knapp Lane lay on the south side of the Forum, near the spice markets. It was typical of the steep, twisty side routes that dive off our major streets. Dive off our major streets, only just wide enough for a wagon to force through, clogged with dry mud, littered with broken spars of wood and waste. Shuttles leaned off their hinges overhead, where the buildings jutted over the street, hiding the sky. There was a musty smell of nighttime occupation by degenerates. A cat yelled viciously as I went past. It was the sort of hole where you worry if you see someone coming, and worry if you don't. It seemed a sorry end for the stately caravans that swung the treasures of Arabia, India, and China halfway across the world for sale in Rome. The warehouse I wanted looked abandoned. There was lush vegetation clogging the ruts in its gateway, and a wrecked wagon lurching on one axle outside. I found them in the open yard, Petronius Longus and nearly a dozen men. Even before I turned in at the gate, the voices of saddened professionals warned me what to expect. I'd heard that subdued note so many times before. Petro strode towards me. Marcus! I lost any hope or doubt. He reached me. He grasped both my hands. His eyes flickered over my bruises, too preoccupied to take them in. He would never be hardened. While other men sit in oyster bars being cynical over nothing, Petronius Longus merely gives his slow, tolerant smile. Turning back at some movement, he put an arm round my shoulders, completely unable to tell me what had happened. It didn't matter. I already knew. They'd found her inside the warehouse. I arrived at the moment when they were carrying her out, so that was when I saw her for the last time. Her white dress hung like a hank of wool over a grim trooper's arm, while her head lolled backwards in a way that was unmistakable. Sasha Kamelina was dead.