 Chapter Nine Pertinax was furious. I felt depressed. Her father looked weary. I offered to help him find her. I saw him snap. "'Stay away from my daughter, Falco!' he cried angrily. Understandable. He could probably guess my interest. Keeping layabouts away from a daughter like that must occupy a lot of his time. I murmured in a responsible tone. So I'm off the case.' "'You were never on it, Falco!' the idyll lay Pertinax crowed. I knew better than to argue with a touchy politician, especially one with such a pained face and pointy nose. Pertinax led his men rummage through my apartment for evidence. They found nothing. Even the sardine plates had been washed, though not by me. Before they left, they rearranged my furniture into handy cordwood sticks, and when I protested, one of them smashed me in the face so hard he all but broke my nose. If Attius Pertinax wanted me to think him a frousty lout with the habits of a gutter rat, he was half way home. As soon as they'd gone, Linnia rushed upstairs to see whether she could inform Smaractus that one of his tenants had expired. My wrecked belongings stopped her short. "'Juno! Your room! And your face, Falco!' The room was nothing special, but I'd once been proud of my face. I needed a new table,' I groaned wittily. "'You can buy wonderful ones nowadays. Decent slice of maple six feet across, bolted on a simple marble stand, just right with my bronze candelabrum.' I used to light my room with a tallow-dipped rush. "'Fool! Your mother says—' "'Spare me,' I said. "'Suit yourself!' She flounced off with her, I'm just the baggage who takes the message's face. Things were not going well. Still, my brain was not completely pulverized. I was too keen on good health to ignore a message from my ma. No need to trouble Linnia. I knew what it would be, and regarding my lost moppet with the malefluous brown eyes, I did have an idea where she was. News travels fast in the Aventine. Petronius turned up, fussing and none too pleased, while I was still exclaiming in agony as I bathed my face. "'Falco! Keep your filthy-mannered civic friends off my patch!' he whistled. Then at once took the black pottery jug from my shaking hand and poured for me himself. It was like old times, after bad nights brawling outside the centurion's dining club in Isca Dumnon-Niorum. At 29, it hurt much more than when we were 19. After a while he propped up what remained of my bench on two bricks from my stove, then sat me down. "'Who did this to you, Falco?' I managed to tell him, using only the left half of my mouth. "'An overexcited idile called Atius Pertinax. I'd like to open him out like a spatchcock chicken, completely boned on a very hot grill.' Petronius growled. "'He hates idiles even more than I do. They get in his way, they upset local loyalties, they take all the credit, then leave him to tidy up their mess.' He prized up my loose floorboard and brought me some wine, but it stung me too much, so he drank it himself. We both hate waste.' "'You all right?' I nodded and let him do the talking. "'I've been checking on the Camillus family. The senator's daughter is away on travel leave. There are two sons, one doing his year in the army in Germany, one bashing a desk, wiping the governor's nose in Bitic and Spain. Your little girlfriend is some hushed up indiscretion of the senator's brother. He's not married. Don't ask me how he gets away with that.' According to the censor's office, Sosia was recorded as the child of one of his slaves, acknowledged, then adopted by him. Could just be her father is a decent type. Or could be a mother was someone more important than he can say.' "'Meet him,' I squeezed out like a sour pip. Bit thin-lipped. Why not in the Senate, too?' "'Usual story. Family could only buy in the political votes once. Elder son was put into purple stripes. Younger foisted into commerce instead. Lucky old commerce.' "'Is it true that you've lost her?' I tried to grin. What a failure.' Petro winced. "'She's not lost. Come with me, Petro. If she's where I think, I need your support.' Sosia Camelina was where I thought.'