CHAPTER XXI I was aiming west, so my passport booked me east. After seven years in the army, that came as no surprise. I planned a gentle trip, with a few days on my own in Londinium, to acclimatize myself. The harbour master, Edgesia Coram, must have signalled across to the depot at Dubris the minute he spotted me. Londinium knew I was coming before I left Gaul. On the key at Retupii, a special envoy was tapping his first-stuff boot, ready to whisk me out of trouble the minute I fell off the boat. The procurator's envoy was a centurion who jumped at special duties in the pompous way such heroes always do. He introduced himself, but he was a lard-faced, lank-haired, unfriendly beggar, whose name I eagerly forgot. His legion was the 20th Valeria, dull worthies who'd covered themselves with glory defeating Queen Boudicca in the revolt. Now their HQ faced the mountains at Vericonium, ahead of the frontier, and the only useful detail I managed to squeeze out of him was that despite the efforts of succeeding governors, the frontier still lay in the same place—the old diagonal boundary road from Isca to Lindum, beyond which most of the islands still lay outside Roman control. I remembered that the silver mines were the wrong side of the line. Everything in Britain had substantially changed. Civilization simply topped the province like a film of wax on an apothecary's ointment pot, easy enough to press your finger through. Vespasian was sending lawyers and academics to turn the tribesmen into Democrats you could safely ask to dinner. The lawyers and academics would need to be good. Ritupii bore all the marks of an imperial entry-port, but once we rode out down the supply road south of the River Tamesis, it was the old scene of smoky round huts clustered in pokey square fields, surly cattle drifting under ominous skies, and a definite sense that you could travel for days over the downs and through the forests before you found an altar to any god whose name you recognized. When I last saw Londinium, it was a field of ash with an acrid smell, where the skulls of massacred commercial settlers were tumbling over one another like pebbles in a clogged and reddened stream. Now it was a new administrative capital. We rode in from the south. We found a spanking bridge, clean-cut wharves, warehouses and workshops, taverns and baths. Not a stick more than ten years old. I caught smells both familiar and exotic, and heard six languages in the first ten minutes. We passed a bare, black site earmarked for the governor's palace, and another great space later where the forum would be. Government buildings reared everywhere, one of which, a busy finance complex with courtyard verandas and sixty offices, housed the procurator and his family. The procurator's private suite had depressing British style. Housed in courtyards, cramped rooms, dark hall, dim corridors, with an airless smell. White-faced, white-legged people existed here among sufficient arrantine dinnerware and Phoenician glass to make life bearable. There were wall paintings in oxblood and ochre, with borders of stalks and vine leaves executed by a plasterer who might twenty years ago have seen a stalk and a bunch of grapes. I arrived halfway through October, and already there was a buffeting blast from the underfloor heating as soon as I walked through the door. Flavius Hilaris strode out from his study to greet me himself. Didius Falco, welcome to Britain. How was your trip? You made good time. Come in and talk while I have your baggage taken up. He was a winsome, vigorous man I had to admire, since he'd stuck it in government service for nearly thirty years. He had crisp brown hair, cut to outline a neat head, and lean, firm hands with straight-cut, clean fingernails. He wore a broad gold ring, the badge of the middle rank. As a Republican, I despised the rank, but from the start, I thought the man himself was excellent. His mistake was that he did a thorough job and saw the funny side. But to conventional judges, these were not the signs of a good mind. The room which the public works officials had designated his private study was in fact used by Hilaris as an extra public office. As well as his own reading couch, shapeless with use, he kept a table with benches where meetings could be held. There were plenty of sconces, all blazing, for it was late. His secretaries had left him on his own, immersed in figure-work and thought. He poured me wine, kind gesture, I thought, putting me at ease. Then with a shock, I realized, maybe putting me off guard. Our interview was conducted with exhausting thoroughness. Compared with this, Hilaris, my client, Camillus Verus, was just a squashy plum. I'd already deleted the procurator from my suspect's list, too obvious, but he made a point of discussing the emperor to demonstrate where his sympathies lay. No better man for the empire, but this is new for Rome. Vespasian's father was a middle-rank finance officer, yet now Vespasian's emperor. My father was a finance officer, and so am I. I warmed to him. Not quite, sir. You're the leading civilian in a prestigious new province, with an emperor who looks on you as a friend. No one but the governor carries more weight in Britain than you. Your father's highest position was as a third-rate tax collector in a one-ox town in Dalmatia. The only reason I knew this was because I delved into his background before I came out. He realized that. He smiled. So did I. And your father was an auctioneer, he threw back at me. My father disappeared so long ago, not many people are aware of that. Possibly still is, I admitted morosely. He made no comment. A polite man, the one who had made sure before I came out to his province that he knew all about me. As for you, Falco, two years army service, then five more is what the legions would call a scout, the type of army agent native tribesmen hang as a spy, if they catch you, which they never did. So you were invalidated out, recovered briskly, perhaps so briskly it smacks of sharp practice, then you took up your present work. My sources say you have a dozy reputation, though past clients speak well of you. Some of the women, he observed, looking down with a prim mouth, have an odd look when they do. I'll let that pass. Then he confronted me with what we'd been skirting round since the interview began. You and I, smiled the British financial procurator, served in the same legion, didius Falco. Well I knew that. He must have realized. Three years apart, same legion, same province. He served when the glorious Second Augusta were the crack troops in the British invasion force. Vespasian was his commander, that was how they met. I served in the second at Isca, at the time when Paulinus, the British governor, decided to invade Mona, Druid's land, to clear out that rat's nest of troublemakers once and for all. Paulinus left us at Isca, guarding his back, but was accompanied by a commandant among his advisory corps. We were stuck, therefore, with an incompetent camp prefect named Penius Postumus, who called Queen Boudica's revolt just a local tiff. When the governor's frantic orders arrived informing this half-wit that the Iceni had swept a bloody swathe all through the south, instead of hering off to join the beleaguered field army, either from terror or further misjudgment, Postumus refused to march out. I served in our legion when its glorious name stank. "'Not your fault,' remarked my new colleague gently, reading my mind. I said nothing. After the rebels were annihilated and the truth came out, our pea-brained camp prefect fell on his sword. We made sure of that. At first he forced us to abandon twenty thousand comrades in open country, with no supplies and nowhere to retreat, facing two hundred thousand screaming Celts. Eighty thousand civilians had been massacred while we polished our studs in barracks. We might have lost all four British legions. We might have lost the governor. We might have lost the province. If a Roman province had fallen in a native rebellion led by a mere woman, the whole empire might have blown away. It could have been the end of Rome. That was the kind of local tiff the British rebellion was. Afterwards we witnessed what the barbarians had done. We saw Camelodunum, where the huddled townsfolk had melted in each other's arms during a four-day inferno at the temple of Claudius. We choked in the black dust of Verulamium and Londinium. We cut down the crucified settlers at their lonely country villas. We flung earth on the burned skeletons of their strangled slaves. We stared in shock and horror at mutilated women hanging like crimson rags from the trees in the pagan groves. I was twenty years old. That was why, when I could, I left the army. It took five years to arrange, but I never had second thoughts. I worked for myself. Never again would I entrust myself to orders from a man of such criminal inaptitude. Never again would I be part of the establishment that foist such fools into positions of command. Flavius Hilarus was still watching me in my reverie. None of us will ever quite recover, he acknowledged, sounding pretty hoarse himself. His face had shadowed, too. While the governor, Paulinus, was frightening mountain tribesmen, this man had been prospecting for copper and gold. Now his job was finance. Below the governor, he sat on the second highest administrative notch. But ten years ago, at the time of the revolt, Gaius Flavius Hilarus had occupied a more junior post. He was the procurator in charge of the British mines. It could be him. My weary brain kept telling me that this clever man, with a clear-eyed smile, could be the villain I'd come to find. He understood the mines, and he could fudge the paperwork. No one in the empire was so beautifully placed. "'You must be exhausted,' he exclaimed softly. I felt drained. "'You missed dinner. I'll send sustenance to your room, but do use our bathhouse first. After you eat, I want to introduce you to my wife.'" These were my first dealings with the diplomatic middle class. Until then, they'd escaped me, for the simple reason that they led life so lacking in deceit that they attracted nobody else's unkind attention and never needed to employ me for themselves. I'd come expecting to be treated like a servant. Instead, I found myself lodged incognito in the procurator's private suite, being offered a welcome more suited to a family guest. Fortunately, I'd packed one set of decent clothes.