 CHAPTER II Fortunately, he was leaving. I stowed the girl in her basket-weaver's portico while I crouched down behind her and fiddled with the straps of the left boot. Who is it? She whispered. Just a blotch of local slime, I told her. I spared her my speech about property magnets as parasites on the poor, but she took the point. He's your landlord! Smart. He's gone? She confirmed it. Taking no chances I asked five or six skinny gladiators at his heels? All black eyes and dirty bandages! Come on then! We pushed through the wet garments, Linear was allowing to dry up in the street, turning our faces away as they flapped back at us, then went in. Linear's laundry. Steam billowed out to flatness. Wash your boys, stamp the clothes, splashing up to their cracked little knees in hot tubs. There was a great deal of noise, slapping the linen, thumping and pounding it, clanging cauldrons, all in a close echoing atmosphere. The laundry took up the whole ground floor, spilling out into the courtyard at the back. We were greeted with derision by the slip-shod proprietess. Linear was probably younger than me, but she looked forty, with a gaunt face and a slack stomach that rolled over the edge of the basket she was carrying. Whisps of frizzled hairs escaped from a colourless ribbon around her head. She cackled with fruity laughter when she saw my honey cake. Thalco! Does your mother let you play with little girls? Ornamentally, I adopted a slaw of expression. Borg and I picked up in the forum. Don't ship her pretty glaze, linear scoffed. Smirractor could slip to hint, pay up, or his fischerboys would be poking their trodons up your delicate parts. If he wants to ring out my arm-purs, he should render a written account. Tell him, tell him yourself! Linear, whose instinct must have been to favour me, kept well clear of my tussle with the landlord. Smirractors paid a certain attention, which at present she was resisting because she liked her independence, but as a good businesswoman she kept her options open. He was foul. I thought Linear was mad. I told her what I'd thought. She had told me whose business I could mind. Her restless gaze flickered again towards my companion. A new client, I boasted. Really? She paid you for the experience? Or you pay enough for the treat? We both turned to survey my young lady. She wore a fine white undertunic, fixed along the sleeves with blue enamel clasps, and over it a sleeveless gown so generous in length it was bunched up over a hurdle of woven gold threads. Apart from the wide bands of patent embroidery at a neck and hem, and in broad stripes down the front, I could tell from the narrowing of Linear's watery eyes we were admiring a quality cloth. My goddess had wire hoops threaded with tiny glass beads in each neat little ear, a couple of chain necklaces, three bracelets on her left arm, four on her right, and various finger rings in the form of knots, serpents or birds with long crossbeaks. We could have sold her girlish finery for more than I earned last year. It was best not to consider how much a brothel keeper might pay us for the pretty wench. She was blonde. Well, she was blonde that month, and since she was hardly from Macedonia or Germany, die must have helped. It was cleverly done. I'd never have known, but Linear informed me afterwards. Her hair had been curled into three soft fat ringlets tied in a clump with a ribbon at the nape of a neck. The temptation to untie that ribbon niggled me like a hornet bite. She painted her face, of course. All my sisters turn themselves out, spanking with colour like newly gilt statues, so I was used to that. My sisters are amazing, but blatant works of art. This was much more subtle, invisibly achieved, except that running in the heat had left one eye very faintly smudged. Her eyes were brown, set wide apart, and sweetly without guile. Linear tide of looking long before I did. Cradle snatcher. She told me, frankly, tinkle in the bucket before you take her up. This was not a request for a medical sample, because cradle-snatching made Linear Diagnosmi as unwell. It was a straight, hospitable offer with business overtones. I shall have to explain about the bucket and the bleach fat. A long time afterwards I described all this to someone I knew well, and we discussed what laundras use for whitening cloth. Distilled wood ash, my companions, suggested doubtfully. They do use ash. They also use carbonate of soda, full of earth, and pipe clay for the brilliant robes of election candidates. But the pristine togas of our magnificent empire are effectively bleached with urine, obtained from the public latrines. The emperor Vespasian, never slow to light on brisk new ways of squeezing out cash, had slapped attacks on this ancient trade in human waste. Linear paid the tax, though on principle she increased her supply for nothing whenever she could. The woman I'd been telling the story to commented in her cool way, I suppose in the salad season, when everyone's eating beetroot, half the togas in the forum are a delicate hue of pink. Do they rinse it out, she inquired? I shrugged in a deliberately vague way. I would have skipped this unsavory detail, but as it turned out eventually, Linia's bleach fat was critical to the tail. Since I lived six floors up in a block that was no better equipped than any other slum in room, Linia's bucket had long been my welcome friend. Linia offered my visitor, not unkindly. Girlie scow behind the cart in rails dear. Linia, don't embarrass my dandy client. I was blushing on her behalf. Actually I'd left home rather suddenly. Dainty, but desperate. My client shot behind the rods where the dried clothes were hung on poles through shoulders to be stretched down with teasels to bring up the nap. While I waited, I topped up my usual bucket and talked to Linia about the weather, as one does. After five minutes I ran out of weather. Get lost, Falco. A card in girl greeted me as I peered around the rails. No sign of my client. Had she been less attractive, I might have let her go. She was extremely attractive, and I saw no reason to part with that sort of innocence to anybody else. Curseing now, I barged past the giant screw clothes presses and out to the laundry yard. There was a furnace heating the well water used in the wash. There were garments spread over wicker frames above braziers of burning suffer, which through some mysterious chemistry smokes in additional whiteness. There were several use scoffing at my fury, and there was a dreadful smell. There was no client. I hopped over a hand-cart and set off fast down the lane. She'd scampered past the direz lamp-black ovens, braved the mitten, and was halfway along the poultry cages where some foot-saw geese and her drooping series flamingo rested for market the next day. As I approached, she pulled up short, her way blocked by a rope-maker, who was unbuckling his belt from his eighteen-stone girth, to ease the task of raping her with that casual brutality which passed in these parts for appreciation of the female form. I politely thanked the rope-maker for looking after her, then before either of them could haggle, I brought her back. This was one client, whose contract would need to be enforced by tying her to my wrist with a long piece of string.