 Chapter 6 The Golden Earring Why, my son, do you so long for ambition? That worst of deities. Oh, do not. The goddess is unjust. Many are the homes and cities once prosperous that she has entered and left to the ruin of her worshippers. Euripides Luke is Cornelius Sulla was born in Rome in 138 BC. As a Cornelius, he belonged to one of the oldest Petrician families in Rome. But though he bore a noble name and the easy arrogance that went with it, Sulla's own particular branch of the family had long since faded into obscurity. No one in his family had risen beyond pright or for three generations, and Sulla did not seem particularly primed to restore the family to glory. As a young man, he coroused with actors, poets, and musicians, the bottom feeders of the Roman social order. He and his friends drank and partied and lived their lives outside the stuffy confines of the respectable classes. During his youth, Sulla also began a romantic relationship with the actor Metrobius who went on to become his lifelong companion. Even as Sulla married, had children, and climbed to the pinnacle of power, Metrobius remained by his side. Though Sulla was a carefree hedonist, he never neglected his studies. He had great natural intelligence and received a good education. By the time he was a teenager, he was fluent in Greek and highly literate in art, literature and history. Despite the low fortunes of his family, Sulla still spent his youth expecting to embark on a public career. But when his father died, Sulla discovered just how far the family fortunes had fallen. Sulla's father was bankrupt and left his son no inheritance. Sulla could not even afford to join the legions as a cavalry officer, the prerequisite to any political career. So rather than spending his twenties in the legions, Sulla continued his disillute life in Rome, renting an inexpensive apartment and living his life in the pursuit of wine, women and song. Sulla cut a striking figure on the streets of Rome, with sharp gray eyes and light reddish hair. Though plagued by breakouts of red splotches on his face, Sulla was a handsome and charismatic young man who commanded the attention of any room. He was eloquent, clever and quick to make friends. He had a mind deep beyond belief in its power of disguising its purposes and was generous with many things, especially with money. He would never entirely leave his early life behind. The friends he made remain close at hand, and in the future Sulla would live something of a double life, stern and composed while dealing with matters of business, and then, once at table, he refused to be serious at all. He underwent a complete change as soon as he took himself to good fellowship and drinking. At age 30, Sulla secured an advantageous marriage to a woman called only Julia, whom it is strongly suspected was a cousin of Gaius Marius' wife Julia, creating an attachment to Marius just as Marius' career was taking off. But though he was married, Sulla was not faithful. He was charismatic and indulged in numerous affairs, especially with older widows who were happy to help him maintain his liberty and lifestyle. Sulla had a particularly prolonged affair with a woman known only by his pet named for her, Nacopolis. She died around 110 BC and named Sulla as her principal heir. Around this time, his stepmother also died and similarly left him all her property. Suddenly Sulla had wealth to match his ambitions. The fact that he had started with so little and acquired so much later made his enemy sneer, how can you be an honest man, they said, when your father left you nothing and yet you are so rich? Sulla used his petrician advantage, plus a hefty fee, to bypass the required service in the Legion before standing for public office. Elected Quistor for 107, Sulla was attached to the command of newly elected consul, Gaius Marius. The contrast between the two men was striking. As a novice homo, Marius had been forced to fight and scrape his way up the cursus and orm. He was not even allowed to stand for military tribune until he had spent a decade in the army. Sulla, on the other hand, walked out of the brothels, waved his petrician credentials, and purchased the job. Narrowing his eyes at this inexperienced dilatant, Marius ordered Sulla to stay behind in Rome to raise cavalry units, ensuring that he would not get in the way as Marius sailed for Numidia to finish the war against Jagartha. When Marius arrived in Africa in early 107, Metallus was unable to overcome his rage at being cast aside, and so he refused the custom of personally handing over command to a successor. Instead, Metallus sent his seconding command to greet Marius and hand over the army. Metallus, meanwhile, sailed back to Rome under a dark cloud of not entirely unjustifiable bitterness. But upon his return to Rome, Metallus found that his honor was not totally besmirched, so Marius had seized the consulship. The Metalli were still powerful, and so the family arranged for Metallus to be met by jubilant crowds and induced the Senate to vote him a triumph. There was a ham-fisted effort to prosecute Metallus for the same charges of extortion and corruption that the mammalian commission had used so effectively, but it went nowhere. The jury refused to even consider the charges, and Metallus was acquitted on all counts. The Metalli family then induced the Senate to award Metallus the title Numidicus for his work. Despite what he must have thought would be a lasting disgrace, Metallus Numidicus maintained his political stature and remained a powerful force in the Senate. Marius, meanwhile, had to make good on his promise to end the work quickly. But now that he was actually running the army and not just carping from the peanut gallery, he realized there was no magic strategy that would work better than what Metallus had already been doing. Jogurtha popped up and disappeared at will and always danced just beyond the reach of the legions. During that first year, Marius managed to force a few encounters with Jogurtha, but the king always seemed to get away. So despite his promises of ending the war in a matter of days, Marius was still chasing the Numidian king as 107 gave way to 106. The assembly kept its faith in him, however, and Marius managed to secure an extension for his command. But as he marched out in 106, he had a major problem on his hands. Jogurtha was nowhere to be found. The Numidian kings were about during the entirety of 106 are unknown. We can say with a fair bit of certainty that he withdrew with his mercenary nomads across the Atlas Mountains to the southern desert country. Marius marched on the city of Capsa and then followed the mountains east, attacking cities and trying to force Jogurtha out of hiding. Finally, he reached the border between Numidia and Mauritania and found along the river Mulacca, one of the last remaining strongholds Jogurtha could possibly rely on. Most importantly, it was where Jogurtha had dumped most of his remaining treasure before taking off across the mountains. Sala had spent the beginning of the campaign in Italy gathering more cavalry, but with his units now filled, he joined Marius' army just as the siege of the fortress along the Mulacca began. Despite Marius' earlier doubts, Sala turned out to be bright, talented and a quick study. Sala threw himself headlong into the soldier's life, never avoided hardship, and was soon regarded as the best soldier in the whole army. Because he had spent his youth among the lower rungs of Roman society, Sala had a natural rapport with the men. He laughed and joked with them, shared their toils, and was generous with favors and money without ever asking repayment. Though the ever cynical solest hints that this was just so Sala could have as many men in his debt as possible. By the time the legions captured the fort of Mulacca, even Marius considered Sala one of the best officers under his command. As the legions marched back to Kerta for the winter, the long absent Jogurtha decided to finally strike. He had revived his alliance with Bocus and the two masked an army and waited to hit the Romans by surprise. The legions narrowly escaped the ambush, though, thanks to a level-headed flanking move led by Sala, which drove the combined Numidian, Mauritania and army into retreat. Two days later, a second battle erupted, and this time the compact and disciplined legions scattered the Africans to the four winds. Bocus fled back to the safety of Mauritania, and Jogurtha disappeared yet again. As Marius tightened the Roman hold on Numidia, the northern border once again began to crack. Roman authority and southern galt had been a relatively new phenomenon. It was not until the late 120's that the legions established a presence, and even then the province of Galiah Narmanensis was nothing but a thin strip of coastline connecting the Alps to the Pyrenees. The Romans had established their hegemony over the region after inflicting a string of defeats on the local Galiak tribes, but in the ruthlessly predatory world of war and politics, you were only on top if you could stay on top. The crushing defeats at the hands of the Kimberi in 113 and 109, crippled Roman prestige. The Kimberi themselves had gone back up the road to central galt after destroying Salonis' legions in 109, but that only opened the door for other tribes to take advantage of the power vacuum. Now a tribe from modern Switzerland called the Tigarini took advantage of Roman setbacks and moved down out of the mountains. So as the newly elected consul Marius raised legions to go to Numidia in 107, his consular Cali, Lukius Kashius Longanus, raised legions to go to galt. It was this double threat that played a big part in the Senate dropping property requirements for service in the legions. This his object was to defeat the Tigarini and repair the damage to the Roman reputation for invincibility that the Kimberi had so thoroughly spoiled. The Tigarini kept raiding west, however, and Longanus shadowed them all the way to the Atlantic Ocean. The Tigarini were aware the Romans were following them, at an opportune moment they laid a trap. The oblivious Longanus led his men directly into an ambush and died in the ensuing battle. One of the defeated legions fell to a legate named Gaius Papilius, who, like young Tiberius Grakis in Spain, was forced to make a life or death decision on behalf of tens of thousands of men. Like Tiberius, Papilius chose life. After promising to hand over half their baggage and pass under the yoke, the battered Romans were allowed to depart. Back in Rome, this defeat was greeted with the same angry shock that always created legions that surrendered. Upon his return to Rome, Papilius was charged with treason. He did not go quietly and snapped back at his accusers. Now, what should I have done when I was surrounded by so great a force of gals? Fight? But then our advance would have been with a small band, remaining camp, but we neither had reinforcements to look for, nor the means to stay alive. Abandoned the camp? But we were blocked. Against the lives of the soldiers, but I thought I had accepted them on the stipulation that so far as possible I should preserve them unharmed for their fatherland and their parents. Reject the enemy's terms, but the safety of the soldiers has priority over that of the baggage. The argument fell on deaf ears, and Papilius was found guilty and exiled. But if there was one thing the Romans had never done, and would never do, it was give up a fight. They certainly did not give back territory they had already won. So even though they seemed to lose every army they sent north, in 106, the Senate dispatched the consul quintus, Servelius Kaipio to do something, anything to solve it's the situation. Kaipio had long been connected to the metallic faction through the patronage of the influential optimantes, scours, and crisis. In most ways Kaipio was everything that was wrong with the Senate at the time. He was arrogant, greedy, self-glorifying, and singularly unable to put the republic's interests above his own. And at his feet would be laid one of the greatest defeats in the history of the Roman Republic. Before he left for the north, Kaipio took care of some business on the optimantes behalf. Likely with support from scours, Kaipio carried a bill through the assembly to roll back the power of the equestrians. Ever since the experience with the mammalian commission, the nobles wanted to regain some control over the courts. Kaipio's bill did not return the jury pool exclusively to the Senate, but instead split it between senators and equestrians. Speaking in defense of the bill, Krasseys gave one of his most famous addresses, one that Cicero himself studied throughout his life. In it, Krasseys called for the assembly to deliver us from the jaws of those whose cruelty cannot be satiated even with blood. Suffer us not to be slaves to any but yourselves as a people whom we both can and ought to serve. The bill passed. Arriving in golf for a campaign in 106, Kaipio finally delivered some good news when he captured the city of Tulosa, modern Tulus in southwestern France. We might not know anything about Kaipio's activities were it not for a famous scandal that soon passed into legend. Upon taking the city, Kaipio's men stumbled across an incredible find. 50,000 bars of gold and 10,000 bars of silver. The fortune was soon identified as the missing treasure from a famous Gallic invasion of Greece way back in 279 that, much like the more recent incursions by the Skrodisky, ended with the plunder of the Oracle of Delphi. But the sacred treasure had apparently carried with it a curse, whoever touched a piece of gold from that sack died a wretched and agonizing death. As the gals were driven out of Greece, they came to suspect that the tainted treasure was a part of their problem. According to legend, the gals dumped most of it in the lakes around Tulosa, but some of it wound up in a temple inside the city. This was the stash that Kaipio's men discovered. But this is only half the story. Kaipio ordered the sacred treasure boxed up and carried down south to Missilia, where it could be shipped by sea to Rome, displayed in Kaipio's inevitable triumph, and then deposited in the temple of Saturn. But that's not what happened. While the treasure was being delivered, the convoy was set upon by a group of bandits and the gold was stolen. Few believed this was random chance. The common assumption was that Kaipio had hired the bandits himself to steal the gold for him. If true, Kaipio's double crime of plundering cursed gold from a sacred temple and then conspiring to steal it all for himself, it was a long way toward explaining his unhappy fate. The historian just and agreed that this sacrilegious act subsequently proved a cause of ruined Kaipio and his army. The rising of the Kimberian War II seemed to pursue the Romans as it to avenge the removal of that devoted treasure. But it could just have easily been that Kaipio was a fool who provoked his own misfortunes without help from the gods. Down in North Africa, it did not take long after the battles at Kerta for King Bocus to reverse course again and beg Marius for peace. Just five days after the dust had cleared, end voice from the Mauritanian king arrived in Kerta, requesting Marius and trusted ambassadors to meet in person with Bocus. Marius selected Luquias Cornelius Sulla to lead the embassy. Though he had only recently arrived, Sulla had already proven himself both eloquent and cool under pressure. Sulla made it clear to Bocus the Romans were open to friendship with the Mauritanians. Though the king had joined the girth as war, the Romans were a practical people. The last thing they needed was for the war in Numidia to keep expanding until it covered all of North Africa. Bocus told Bocus that we already have more than enough subjects, while neither we nor anyone else ever had friends enough. But he also reminded the king that while the Romans have never been outdone in kindness, their prowess in war you know by experience. Bocus took the hint. He asked permission to send an embassy directly to Marius to work out the preliminaries of a permanent peace. Sulla agreed and returned to curta to make his report. On their way to meet Marius however, the small party of Mauritanian ambassadors was jumped by a gang of brigands. Taking a hasty flight and leaving all their baggage and papers behind, the envoys arrived at curta looking like refugee peasants rather than royal agents of a great king. But Sulla secured further a diplomatic trust between the two powers by graciously welcoming them into the city and refusing to doubt for a minute their pitiful story. The ambassadors were apparently surprised to discover that the corrupt and treacherous Romans were in fact quite civilized and generous. After hearing the ambassadors out, Marius called a war council in early 105 that voted to send the Mauritanian ambassadors on to Rome with a recommendation that the senate conclude a peace. The senate concurred and decreed that the senate and people of Rome are want to remember both a benefit and an injury. But since focus repents, they forgive his offense. He shall have a treaty of friendship when he has earned it. The king was delighted to find the Romans so amenable to a peace. He sent a message back to Marius requesting that Sulla, who had displayed generous wisdom thus far, serve as Roman representative. With Sulla's help, the king could begin the practical process of aligning Mauritanian and Roman interests. Marius agreed. As escorted by Bocus's son to ensure safe passage, Sulla and his bodyguards were not sure whether they were being led into a trap. Their fears peaked when scouts suddenly arrived and alerted the party that Jigurtha himself was camped just two miles ahead. Sulla and his companions braced for treachery, but Bocus's son swore his father's good intentions. The prince promised to march side by side with Sulla the whole way. Jigurtha could not risk the prince's life as it would permanently sever any chance he had of reforming the alliance with Bocus. So in dramatic fashion, the party continued writing past Jigurtha's camp. Though the tension in the air must have been impossibly thick, the Numidian king simply watched them pass. The final act of the Jigurthian war played out as a game of high stakes negotiations between Sulla and Bocus on the one hand and Bocus and Jigurtha on the other. Bocus and Sulla met openly in the Maritanian court, where the king told Sulla that he had not made up his mind how to proceed. He requested Sulla give him ten days to compose a final answer, but this was merely a trick played on Jigurtha's spies, who dutifully raced to the Numidian camp and reported that Jigurtha had ten days to change Bocus's mind. But in the middle of that same night, Bocus summoned Sulla for the real meeting. Bocus told Sulla that he would never cross the Malooka River that marked the border with Numidia, and that all he had, soldiers, ships and money, was at Rome's disposal. Sulla accepted all of this with calculated regard. He told Bocus that the Romans felt no gratitude for the king's pledges, as they had already defeated the Maritanians in battle. If Bocus wanted to earn his treaty of friendship, there was only one way to do it. And over Jigurtha. The next day, Bocus summoned a courteer he knew to be in touch with Jigurtha, and passed along a message for the Numidian king. Bocus said he was about to make a peace with Rome. What could Jigurtha offer to make him change his mind? A reply came back quickly from Jigurtha. The Numidian king promised Bocus anything he wanted to restore the alliance. For starters, Jigurtha would hand over nearly a third of Numidian territory. Jigurtha also proposed that Bocus kidnap Sulla, and then together they could ransom him to the Senate and force the legions to withdraw from Africa entirely. Bocus agreed to meet Jigurtha at a secluded location outside of the city. With both sides having made their pitches, Bocus found himself with an ulcer-inducing decision to make. Betray his fellow king to the Romans and possibly risk the wrath of his subjects, or seize Sulla and risk the wrath of the legions. The kings date up the whole night before the rendezvous with Jigurtha, deciding what to do. The next day, Bocus, Sulla, and a small party of retainers rode out toward the secluded spot. Bocus was about to double-cross either Sulla or Jigurtha, and to Sulla's satisfaction, Jigurtha drew the short straw. Bocus's men surrounded the clearing, and when Jigurtha appeared, the men sprang out of the ambush. Jigurtha's few remaining retainers were killed, and the king himself was seized and handed over to Sulla. Sulla dutifully delivered Jigurtha in chains to Marius. Twelve years after Jigurtha had begun all this by assassinating E. E. E. M. S.O. and seven years after the Senate had been forced to declare war following the massacre at Kerta, the war with Jigurtha was over. But this happy news was about to be blotted out by an unfathomable disaster in the north. The Kimbury had first arrived in 113, defeated the Romans at Noria, and then moved on. After a four-year hiatus, they had come back down the Rome River in 109, and defeated the Romans again. Now after yet another four-year cycle, the Kimbury came back around in 105. Once again migrating down the road toward the Mediterranean coast. The Senate was understandably spooked by the return of this enemy that had bested them twice. Though now widely suspected of playing a role in the disappearance of the Talosa Gold, the Senate extended Kaipio's command in the north and kept his army intact. Two full Roman legions was twice as many Italian allies and Gallic auxiliary forces, bringing his combined numbers up to somewhere around 35,000. To double the number on the northern front, the Senate instructed one of the consuls for 105, Gnias Mollius Maximus, to gather an army of equal strength. This time, the Kimbury must be destroyed. It was a good thing the property requirements had been dropped, or Rome might not have been able to muster the strength to put the 60 to 80,000 men through the Alps while simultaneously maintaining the legions in Numidia. Gnias Mollius was not just any newly elected consul though. He was, like Marius, a Novus Homo. Between 191 and 107, only three confirmed Novus Homo had been elected consul. But in the rising tide of Papulare agitation, the Senate could not stop a string of Novus Homo from entering office. In the 14 years between 107 and 94, five Novus Homo would be elected consul, and Gnias Marius himself would become far and away the most dominant leader in Rome. When Mollius drew Gnal as his province, the Senate was once again forced to trust a new man with the safety of Rome. In the Roman military hierarchy, no one outranked a consul. When Mollius arrived in Gnal, it was his right to supplant Kaipio as Commander-in-Chief. But Kaipio, being the arrogant noble that he was, greeted the Novus Homo Mollius with nothing but dismissive insolence. He claimed to be operating in a separate geographic province on the other side of the Rome, and insisted on maintaining autonomy on his side of the river. This lack of unity between the two senior commanders, which all the sources lay squarely at Kaipio's feet, was the principal cause of their shared demise. There was not one 60,000 strong Roman army, there were two 30,000 man armies, and the Kimberi would fatally exploit the difference. In early October 105, a forward patrol from Mollius's legion scouting the approach of the Kimberi unexpectedly ran right into the main body. The patrol was surrounded and destroyed. Realizing the Kimberi would be arriving any minute, Mollius begged Kaipio to cross the round and join their armies together. Kaipio mocked Mollius, saying that he would be happy to cross the river and help the Frighten Novus Homo consul, who was obviously quaking in his boots over nothing. The two Roman armies converged near Arousio on the east bank of the round, but out of a mixture of hubris and spite, Kaipio still refused to join his army to Mollius'. Kaipio even blew off envoys from the Senate who begged him to submit. Kaipio not only refused, he camped with his army situated between his colleague Mollius and the Kimberi. The long-held suspicion is that Kaipio's grand plan was to bring the Kimberi to battle first and forced Mollius to play a supporting role, embarrassing the new man, and capturing all the glory for himself. When ambassadors from the Kimberi came to make their request for land, Kaipio roundly abused them and sent them packing. We do not know whether Kaipio then marched out to instigate battle or whether he waited for the Kimberi to come to him, but it's clear he provoked the disaster to come. He never once seemed to realize that the Romans were about to face hundreds of thousands of Kimbrick warriors and that even combined the Romans would be outnumbered. When the battle began, it is likely that Kaipio's forward army was overwhelmed by the first wave. Push backward, Kaipio's forces would have run into Mollius' army and created a confusing tangle without form, direction, or unity of purpose. This frustrated mob of confused legionaries was then surrounded by the Kimberi and pinned against the round. With nowhere to go and all order lost, the Kimberi consumed the trapped legions like acid eating through flesh. By nightfall, the Romans were not just defeated, they were annihilated. The sources placed the total dead at somewhere between 60,000 to 80,000 legionaries plus another 40,000 camp followers. Everyone agrees that almost no one made it out alive. There were some survivors who got away, both Kaipio and Mollius made it back to Rome, as did a young officer named Quintus Certorius who was able to swim across the river to safety. He would go on to become one of the greatest generals in Roman history. Many more Romans were presumably taken as slaves, but taken together, it is clear that the Battle of Arousio was one of the single greatest disasters in the history of Rome, from its founding in 753 BC to the fall of the West in AD 476, all now seemed lost in Gaul. But a funny thing happened on the way to Armageddon. The Kimberi, again withdrew. The ancient historians never spent much time trying to explain the motives and actions of the Kimberi, so it's left a modern historian to speculate that in all likelihood, the Kimberi were never interested in invading Italy. But instead, simply wanted to keep the violent and aggressive Romans bottled up on the Italian peninsula. So after demonstrating to the Romans three times in a row that they best not mess with the Kimberi, the tribe withdrew again and migrated west toward Spain. The panic in Rome must have been severe. With the elections for the next year's consulship approaching, there was no question who the people thought could stave off the end of Roman civilization, which appeared to be the stakes. The assembly did not want another incompetent cargo, or overmatched Salonis, or fatally arrogant Kaipio. The people wanted Gaius Marius. The assembly tossed aside two more pieces of most myorom to get their wish. Roman lost still for beta man from serving a second consulship within ten years of his first election, and a candidate had to be physically present in Rome to stand for election. The assembly ignored both rules and elected Marius in abstentia to his second consulship in three years. The assembly settled loose ends in Numidia and prepared to return to Rome. On January the 1st 104, Gaius Marius celebrated the beginning of his second consulship with a triumph. Not since the glory days of the conquest of Carthage and Greece had a triumph been this spectacular. Emilionus's parade after Numontia, a parade Marius himself would have marched in, was a famous disappointment. Since then, it had been a string of victories against various Gaelic and Thracian tribes, whose spoils paled in comparison to the Treasurer's Roman consuls had once returned from campaign with. But Marius's triumph was of great magnificence. Treasurer slaves and wonders warnements of the exotic African kingdom paraded to wild cheering from a population still reeling from the disaster to Rousio just three months earlier. The crown jewel of Marius's triumph was King Joguertha himself. The last time Joguertha was in Rome, he had bribed senators, defied the assembly, and ordered an assassination. He managed to upend domestic Roman politics and stay one step ahead of the legions for a decade. Now he was bound in chains like a common criminal and forced to march alongside his two sons, facing the humiliation of being the object not of awe and fear, but mockery and ridicule. At the end of the triumphal parade, Joguertha was tossed into a prison cell so roughly that the gold earring he wore, the last piece of gold he had to his name, was ripped clean out of his ear. There was no more bribery, no more cunning plans. The Romans left him to die in a dungeon pit, naked, and starving. He himself too, conquered and in chains, saw the city of which he had vainly prophesized that it could be bought and would one day perish if it could find a purchaser. In Joguertha it had a purchaser. If it had been for sale, but once it had escaped his hands, it was certain that it was not doomed to perish. After six days of defiant resistance, Joguertha finally dropped dead on the floor. But Marius was not able to enjoy his triumph in peace. Men who disdain the usurping Novis Homo praised the young noble Sulla as the real captor of Joguertha. According to military and political tradition, the men who held impure him over a province received all credit and all blame for the fortunes of war. It was how it had always been done. It was most myorim. But enemies of Marius encouraged Sulla to tell his story. The proud and ambitious Sulla was all too happy to play the game and went so far as to cast as his personal seal an image depicting the capture of Joguertha. Marius was not amused. This was the first seed of that bitter and incurable hatred between Marius and Sulla, which nearly brought Rome to ruin.