 Chapter 13. Dictator for Life. The Republic is nothing, a mere name without body or form. Julius Caesar. In the aftermath of his decisive victory at the Colleen Gate, Salah set up a headquarters on the Compass Martius. Though he was the master of Rome, at the moment he held no official majesty-see. He was not a consul, or a prieitor, or a legate, or even a quistor. His only claim to constitutional sovereignty came from his pro-consular assignment to the myth-rhodotic war. That appointment was now five years old and concerned a war that had already been won. But it was all Salah had. By law, a provincial governor's sovereignty expired when he crossed the sacred Pomerium and re-entered Rome. In the routine course of empire, this was a mere formality as men entered in exited office. But for Salah, it trapped him outside of Rome. If he crossed the city limits, he would lose all his sovereign authority. Despite ignoring the Pomerium so brazenly during his first march on Rome, Salah now elected to maintain this strange facade of constitutional scruples. So he called the Senate to assemble at the temple of Bologna outside the walls rather than cross the sacred boundary. When the Senate assembled, Salah did not discuss the civil war, but instead presented an account of his actions in the myth-rhodotic war. After he listed his accomplishments in the east, he requested the right to enter the city in triumph. It was as if the last two years hadn't happened. But there was a dark backdrop to this charade. Before addressing the Senate, Salah ordered 6,000 Sam Knight prisoners, hurried it into the adjacent circus flaminius. The Sam Knights had been told they were going to be counted and processed as prisoners of war, but they soon learned the truth. As Salah began reading his report on the myth-rhodotic war to the Senate, his men surrounded the 6,000 prisoners in the circus flaminius and methodically massacred them. Their screams were impossible to ignore inside the temple of Bologna, and the dumb-founded senators were horrified. If Salah bade them to please continue to listen to his remarks and not concern themselves with what was going on outside, for it was only that some criminals were being admonished. When the killing was done and the disturbed senators departed, Salah called an open meeting to address the people of Rome. He reiterated that only his enemies need fear his wrath. For the first time, Salah specifically said the defection of Azeodicus's army was the dividing line. Those who had exercised wisdom and joined him before that point could expect peace and friendship. Those who had remained under arms after that point were to be liquidated as enemies of the state. But he also pointedly said that the plebs are bonnet and the common soldiers had nothing to fear from him. Salah scrupulously allowed that these men had merely followed wicked leaders, and it was the leaders, not the followers, who should pay. With anxiety running high in the richer quarters of the city, a small deputation of senators approached Salah and asked for some relief. They said, we do not ask you to free from punishment those whom you have determined to slay, but to free from suspense those whom you have determined to save. When Salah replied that he did not know whom he would save, one senator said, let us know whom you intend to punish. If everyone knew whom Salah considered his mortal enemy, it would resolve a lot of anxiety on the Palatine Hill. Salah took their words to heart and spent the night with his closest advisors, talking it through. Obviously, men who had served magistracies or senior commands in the Sinan regime would be marked for death, as would any non-combatant senator who had actively collaborated with the regime. The next morning, Salah posted an inscribed tablet containing 80 names. These named men could be killed on site and their property confiscated. The Salah prescriptions had begun. The list of prescribed enemies started as a way to free the innocent from fear. When the original list of 80 names went up, it seemed that the surgeon's Salah was going back to work. Yes, it was a sevenfold increase over the twelve men named after the first march on Rome, but a lot had happened since then. Salah's enemies had declared him an enemy of the state, seized his property, exiled his family, killed his friends, and forced him to fight a civil war. 80 seemed a bargain to a tone for all that. But though a few of these 80 men scrambled to extract themselves from Rome, most already knew they could expect no mercy. Carbo, Norbonus, and Certorius were all on the list. They had fled already. Since Marius had escaped Salah's wrath by dying, Salah settled for demolishing Marius' monuments and digging up the body of his late nemesis and scattering the bones. But the next day, the people of Rome awoke to a frightening revision. Overnight, Salah posted in the form a new list with 220 additional names. One who had breathed the sigh of relief the day before now faced death. The following morning, another new list went up. It now contained more than 500 names. Now everyone lived in fear that at any moment they would be prescribed. A man who had been spared from the original lists arrived in the form one day to discover his name was now posted. When he discovered he was marked for death, he tried to cover his face and withdraw, but he was spotted, attacked, and killed on the spot. Another man reveled in the early days of the killing and mocked those who faced grim death. His name appeared on the list the next day. He was killed and his property confiscated. In addition to the prescribed themselves, anyone caught harboring a fugitive was also subject to immediate execution. Far from relieving tension, the prescription blanketed Italy under a reign of terror. As the prescriptions continued, the promise to limit victims to Salas personal enemies went up and smoked. Salah not only paid a bounty for every head delivered, but he allowed the murderers a share of the victim's property. This led to an odious mingling of political prescription and personal profit, as men with hard hearts and empty wallets, fanned out across the peninsula to get rich, killing Salas enemies. With the official prescription list ever changing, a man's name could be added to the list simply because he was rich and held valuable property. An apolitical equestrian named Quintis O'Raleus found his name posted on the list and lamented that he was done for because of my Alvin farm. Out in the countryside of Italy, the list itself acted as a basic guideline with improvisation left to the discretion of senior officers. Among those sent forth was Marcus like Quintis Crasis, hero of the Battle of the Colleen Gate, accompanied by a greedy and brutal young officer named Gaius Varus. Crasis traveled with circuit across Italy, taking testimony from locals about anti-Sullans in their midst. The guidelines of the prescription now included any family that had rendered material aid to Salas enemies, so local merchants, bankers and magistrates were seized and executed. But as often as not, local pro-Sullan leaders took the opportunity to eliminate personal rivals, naming men who were not enemies of Sulla, but enemies of themselves. Little care or notice was taken why a man was named, but the punishment was always the same. Execution and confiscation of property. Crasis and Varus both became experts at this swift and profitable justice. Beginning his infamously sadistic career in real estate, Crasis had a man executed in Brutium just to seize an attractive estate. Aside from Salas formal representatives like Crasis, unofficial murder gangs also now roamed the streets. Professional prescription became a lucrative business to get into. Joining these gangs was another ambitious youth with a cruel streak, named Lucius Sargius Catalina, more commonly known as Cataline. In twenty years, Cataline would stand at the center of another cycle of revolutionary upheaval, but for the moment he was simply a young Salan partisan on the make. Coveting the property of his brother-in-law, Cataline killed the man to get title to the land. Then he made a run through the equestrian merchant class, murdering his way to an impressive portfolio. He rounded this out by targeting his other brother-in-law, who just so happened to be Marcus Marius Gratidionis, the nephew of Marius who had introduced the measure to guarantee coins during the Sin and Regime. Falsely accusing Gratidionis of murdering Catalis during the Mariantair, Cataline dragged his brother-in-law to Catalis' tomb and brutally murdered him. With the rules collapsing, the prescription became self-perpetuating, as new victims could always be named. One man was killed for lamenting the death of his friend. One of Salah's freedmen killed another man to settle a personal score, then conspired to add the victim's name to the list after the fact. Another freedman was dragged to face Salah after he was discovered hiding one of the prescribed. To his astonishment, Salah discovered the man was his old upstairs neighbor from when he lived in the rented apartment before his public career began. Salah ordered his old neighbor, tossed from the Tarpeian rock. The prescription soon reached beyond Italy, as many of Salah's principal enemies had fled the peninsula. Norbonus was located in Rhodes. Agents of Salah demanded the city hand him over or face grave consequences. As the Rhodians debated what to do, Norbonus did them all a favor by going down to the marketplace and committing suicide. Salah also dispatched Pompey to personally hunt down Carbo. Having intelligence that Carbo was on an island off the coast of Sicily, Pompey sailed for Sicily. Upon arrival, Pompey convened summary tribunals to identify and execute known anti-Sullan partisans. When the people of Masana protested that the tribunals were illegal, Pompey snapped, cease quoting laws to us that have swords. Carbo was soon tracked down and dragged before the tribunal. Though Carbo was still technically consul of Rome, Pompey paid the sanctity of the office no mind. He ordered Gennias Papyrius Carbo, three-time consul of Rome, executed on the spot. In the final stage of the prescriptions, the killing became indiscriminate. Because this was ancient Rome and not the digital age, no one really knew what a prescribed man actually looked like. When a prescription gang had trouble tracking down the real victim, they seized random people off the street. These anonymous heads were then presented to Sulla as if they were real men from the list. Sulla asked few questions and always paid the bounty. The idea that there was any rationality or morality to the prescriptions became a cruel joke. The whole state was now plunging headlong into ruin. Averis furnished a motive for ruthlessness. The magnitude of one's crime was determined by the magnitude of his property. He who possessed riches became a malifactor and wasn't each case the price set up for his own murder. In short, nothing was regarded as dishonorable that brought profit. As the weeks passed and the killing continued, some effort was finally made to end the terror. Sulla announced that no more names would be prescribed after June 1st, 82. In the meantime, men already on the list might use friends influential with Sulla to get their names off the list. The most famous case of this sort, being 19-year-old Gaius Julius Caesar. The Gaius Julius Caesar. In addition to the crime of being Marius's nephew, a Caesar had also married Sulla's daughter. Sulla ordered Caesar to divorce his wife, but Caesar refused. So Caesar's name went on the prescription list and he was forced into hiding. But the young man had friends deep in Sulla's inner circle, and after a few weeks they secured him a pardon. Sulla did not grant the pardon without reservation, however, and said, have your way and take him. Only bear in mind that the man you are so eager to save will one day deal the death blow to the cause of the aristocracy, which you have joined with me in upholding. Or in this Caesar, there is more than one Marius. The sweeping orgy of terror finally wound itself down after the June 1st deadline came and went. Guilty men could still be tracked down and killed, but the worst was now over. A final accounting will never be possible, but at a minimum, about 100 senators and over 1,000 equestrians were killed in the Sulla prescriptions, with the death toll possibly as high as 3000. But good to his word, Sulla and his assassins mostly left the lower classes of Italy alone. Not only were they spared for noble reasons, but also because they had no property that was liable to make them, quote unquote, guilty. As the killing wound down, it was time for Sulla to embark on the rejuvenation of the republic, made possible by his purge of his enemies. While his agents prowled the streets, Sulla himself had not yet found a way to enter Rome without losing his constitutional authority. The best option would be to secure election as consul, but technically the consuls for the year were still Carbo and Marius the Younger. With Carbo dead in Sicily and Marius the Younger's head rotting in the forum, they were not available to convene elections. So Sulla had to get more creative. While Sulla fredded over his sovereignty, the remaining rump of the Senate took steps to legitimize his actions. They accepted his report on the myth-redotic war and confirmed all the settlements he had made in Asia. They repealed the decree making him an enemy of the state. They even ordered a large statue of Sulla be erected in the forum, bearing the inscription of Sulla's own devising. Lucius Cornelius Sulla Felix. The title Felix now entered his official propaganda. It meant Sulla the fortunate. But all those decrees still left Sulla on the other side of the walls. So Sulla offered a radical suggestion. Revive the ancient dictatorship. It had been 120 years since Rome gave itself over to the hands of a dictator. Once a ubiquitous office in the early days of the Republic, the dictatorship had been abandoned in the triumphant era of the Republican Empire. Even recent existential emergencies like the Kimberian Wars and the Social War had not triggered a revival of the office, nor had the violent unrest of the Grocchi and Saturninus. From his headquarters on the Compass Martius, Sulla composed a long letter to the Senate proposing they make him dictator. He said that Italy was devastated, the Republic gutted by the fire of a brutal civil war. There was no aspect of social, political or economic life that had not been upended by the events of the last decade. If Sulla was to fulfill his destiny and restore the Republic to its former glory, he needed more than consular authority. He needed absolute and unquestioned authority. Sulla's suggestion was a shocking deviation from all accepted custom. But what was the Senate to do? They know. It was like asking the legions surrounded in Numontia in 137 if they wanted to be slaughtered, so they complied with Sulla's request. To bridge the constitutional gap now that both sitting consuls were dead, the Senate revived the ancient office of Interrex. The Republic had occasionally used an Interrex to oversee consular elections if the consuls were dead or so indisposed that they could not return to Rome. Since this was obviously the case, the Interrex convened the assembly and presented a bill to make Sulla, dictator, legabuse, fachiendis, at Republiqai, Constitieinai, dictator for the making of laws and settling of the Constitution. The assembly passed the bill unanimously. With plenty of legal advisers on hand and with a decent grasp of constitutional law himself, Sulla ensured his new title came with all requisite powers to act without constraint. As dictator, Sulla now had the power of life and death over all Romans. He had sole discretion over declarations of war and peace. He could appoint or remove senators. He could confiscate property at will. He could found new cities and colonies. He could punish and destroy existing cities. He had the final say in all matters and the provinces, the treasury and the courts. Most importantly, the dictators every decree automatically became law. The enormous constitutional force of the assembly now existed at Sulla's mere word. Despite the irregular way Sulla entered the dictatorship, this was all mostly in keeping with the ancient powers of the office. He even appointed a master of the horse, the traditional partner of the dictator who answered to no one but the dictator. But there was a large and unprecedented omission from the law naming him dictator, an expiration date. Old Roman dictators never served terms longer than six months, a limit literally written into the law that created their dictatorship. But Sulla conveniently left that part out. After hinting to the Senate that six months might not be enough to restore the republic, Sulla implied his dictatorship was to be held in perpetuity. With no legal obligation to ever set his vast array of powers aside, Lucius Cornelius Sulla was now dictator for life. Despite all the constitutional reforms he was about to unveil to restore the proper order of the old republic in the next generation, the mundane rules of republican order paled in comparison to the example of a single man holding unlimited power indefinitely. And it would be the dictatorship of Sulla, not the republic of Sulla, that would be his lasting legacy. Sulla had already revealed much of what he planned for the republic after his first march on Rome. Before leaving to take command of the mythrhodotic war, he carried laws to expand the power of the Senate, including moving all voting to the less democratic, centurion assembly, expanding the roles of the Senate, and requiring the Senate's consent before a bill could be presented to the assembly. After Sulla took over Rome, these reforms were cancelled, but now they returned as a part of Sulla's final constitutional settlement. To his original kernel of reforms, the dictator Sulla introduced a package of new laws to place the Senate back at the center of the republic. With the Tribune it so often used to lob anti-senatorial bombs, Sulla severely curtailed their power. Originally designed to protect the individual rights of plebeians, the office had morphed into a dangerous instrument of demagogues and tyrants. So in addition to requiring a Tribune to seek permission from the Senate before introducing a bill, Sulla also abolished the all-purpose, all-powerful veto. A Tribune could now only levy a veto in matters pertaining to individual requests for clemency, but more important than these procedural restrictions. Sulla decreed that men elected Tribune were barred from all other magistracies. This prohibition ensured that ambitious young leaders would never seek the office again. But once had been a springboard into politics, was now a dead end. The Tribune contained Sulla then formalized the rest of the republican list of magistracies. Until now, rules of progression up the cursus and norm from Quistor to Consul had always been vague and unspoken. Sulla formalized the path. He also expanded the ranks of offices, doubling the number of Quistors to 20 and adding two more prietors. Sulla was long overdue to add more official administrative posts to match their expanded empire. Sulla also decreed that two years had to elapse in between offices no matter what, and 10 years had to pass before a man could run for the same office. There would be no repeat consulships in Sulla's republic. Sulla did not want to repeat it governorship either. With eight prietors and two consuls now serving annually, there would be no need to keep men in provinces for more than a year or two. But this was not about improving provincial administration. Provincial assignments gave men access to wealth, connections, and power. Keeping a high rate of turnover in the provinces did nothing to help Roman provincials, but it helped maintain the balance of power back in the Senate. It went without saying that all provincial assignments would be controlled by the Senate. The assembly would have nothing to do with it. To match the expanded cursus and orm, Sulla also doubled the roles of the Senate from 300 to 600. As dictator, Sulla naturally took the liberty to assign all the new senators. The course of the civil wars had dwindled the number of living senators below 200 anyway. So over the course of his dictatorship, he regularly elevated loyal officers and virtuous friends into the Senate. But even Sulla did not personally know 400 worthy candidates. He took suggestions from various parties and created a whole cohort of grateful senators. Loyal not just a Sulla, but to the reformed republic he created. With an expanded Senate now filling up, Sulla could also restore control of the courts. The fight that had been ongoing back to the days of the Grokai would now be settled once and for all. The jury pool for permanent courts would be the Senate. The decree enlarging the Senate was partly meant to give the Senate sufficient manpower to dispense justice in the array of permanent courts Sulla now established. The first permanent court the Romans established was the extortion court way back in 149. Over the years, other courts had been created to serve various needs, almost certainly a court to try cases for electoral fraud and most famously, Saturninas' treason court that had been established in 103. Sulla now proposed to clean up and systematize the hodgepodge of tribunals and courts with seven new permanent courts for murder, counterfeiting and forgery, electoral fraud, embezzlement, treason, personal injury and provincial extortion. Some of these already existed. Some were new and others were altered from previous iterations. Saturninas' treason court, which originally resembled a revolutionary tribunal, was now limited to a few explicit crimes. There would be no revolutionary tribunals in Sulla's Republic. Sulla also used his dictatorial power to address the always vital question of land distribution. The chaos of the civil wars and Sulla's ultimate victory opened up wide new swathes of land in Italy for settlement for the first time in 30 years. Tons of Italian land already lay vacant thanks to the upheavals of the past few years, and Sulla also doled out heavy punishment to regions that had opposed him. Atroria, Umbria and Samnium, deep wells of anti-Sullan resistance were targeted for mass seizure of property and redistribution to Sulla's own veterans. Sulla's run of reforms was designed to roll the Republic back to its roots as a senatorial aristocracy. Almost all authority now emanated from the Senate. The tribunes were stripped of their power, the autonomy of the assembly curtailed. Equestrians in public honey returned to a state of political and economic subservience. He even made an attempt at passing sanctuary laws to limit expenses on games, bankwits and personal finery, but as usual, fees came to nothing. Sulla himself ignored his own limits routinely, but it would be unfair to say that Sulla's head was stuck in the past. He believed he was building a regime to address specific problems of the present that had plagued the Republic, and with his reforms they might not plagued the Republic in the future. One of the biggest problems that could not be solved by looking to the past was the fate of the Italians. Looking to the past would have meant going back to the old confederal hierarchy of citizenship, but Sulla never considered breaking his word to honor CBTAS and Safragyam. When the next census arrived, the number of citizens on the rolls doubled, and from that point on, the Italian question was never heard again. Most as they had always feared, the old Romans lost influence, and Italians gained a larger voice. But so what? There was no longer any reason to treat a man born in Latium any different than a man born in Picanum. The voice of the Roman citizen was not lost, it simply changed pitched with the addition of new voices. Rome now belonged to everyone. Despite his dictatorial power being held in perpetuity, Sulla never intended to stay in the dictatorship indefinitely. He considered himself a unique and special law giver, but he was at heart a Republican, not a king. He meant exactly what he said when he assumed the dictatorship. He was going to make laws and settle the Constitution. Not being a petty tyrant, Sulla had no intention of infinitely delaying when the Constitution would be declared settled. He was there to do the job he believed the gods wanted him to do, and then resign. Sulla began the process of shedding power about a year after he assumed office. In mid-81, he announced that he would be a candidate for consul alongside Metallus Pius. Still scrupulously treated as a near equal, Sulla considered Pius' continued partnership with his regime, one of the last great examples of Fortunus favor. Pius could have made a great deal of trouble for the dictator, but instead accepted the transformation Sulla promised to inaugurate. Their shared consulship would be assigned not only of continued friendship, but also Sulla's intention to not remain dictator for life. But though this was all going great for Sulla, and he was ready to start playing the part of a Republican again, one of his subordinates stepped forward to make a nuisance of himself. The election for 80 was supposed to be a stage-managed affair, but instead one of Sulla's prietors got it into his head to take a crack at the consulship. Sulla had sent word-round for bidding such distractions, but out of inexplicable bravado, the man entered his name anyway. Even after he was explicitly pulled to stand down, the oblivious prietor returned to the forum to canvas for votes. Sulla had no choice but to order the man killed where he stood. This unpleasant business concluded, Sulla called for a mass meeting to address all the citizens of Rome. As he had done so many times before, Sulla was ready to share his plans to create an honest bond of trust between them all. He planted himself in the forum and announced he was resigning the dictatorship. He now stood before them as a citizen of Rome and was ready to answer all questions or challenges. Then he dismissed his official bodyguards and walked out into the streets. He was no longer dictator of Rome. He was simply Sulla. But in an amusing coda to his voluntary renunciation of power, when Sulla departed the forum, he was followed by a boy who heckled him mercilessly. During his house and leaving the obnoxious jeers behind, Sulla ride-liquipped, this young man will prevent any future holder of such power from laying it down. But Sulla was himself serious about shedding power. He and Pius were elected consuls for 80. But after this further year governing Rome, not as dictator, but as consul, Sulla was ready to move on. When the assembly returned Sulla as consul for 79, he declined to serve. He accepted an almost honorary pro-consulship in Cisalpine Gaul, but never visited the province. Instead, he moved down to a country villa in Campania. There, he lived at the center of a country court that signaled a free-wheeling embrace of his old carefree ways. He hosted his old friends in the theater community, intellectuals from across the Mediterranean, and the political elite from across the known world. Sulla never stopped paying close attention to Roman politics, and Roman politics never stopped paying attention to Sulla. But the Sulla era was truly over. Back in Rome, the Sulla infection was for the most part united around Sulla's constitutional reforms. But that did not mean they were united in purpose. Their legions to one another had come from a shared allegiance to Sulla. Now that he was withdrawing, everyone was free to pursue their own factional backbiting. Metallus Pius was too imperious, pompy to arrogant, praises to greedy. Sulla's republic may have tried to confine these disputes to a healthy give and take in the political arena, but that did not mean there would be harmony. In between drinking sessions, Sulla spent much of his time composing an enormous memoir that would explain and justify everything he had ever said or done. He filled it with detailed accounts of every campaign he fought in, every office he held, every piece of public business he had transacted, why his friends were his friends, and why his enemies were his enemies. This memoir was meant to paint a clear picture of Sulla as the chosen son of Fortuna, who was guilty only of courage, fidelity, patriotism. Sulla's final plan to control events was a masterful success, as later historians relied heavily on the memoir as a primary source. Our own understanding of Sulla some 2,000 years later is still very often his version of events. When he retired, Sulla was still only about 60 years old. Not young by any means, but also nowhere near death. As Sulla completed his memoirs, he no doubt looked forward to at least another decade of honorable retirement. His wife, Mattella, had recently died, but he had taken a new bride and had another new baby on the way. But he also had premonitions of his imminent demise. He described a dream where his dead son appeared to him and besought his father to pursue an end to anxious thoughts and come with him to his mother Mattella, there to live in peace and quietness with her. But even these unsettling dreams did not deter him from working on his memoir or transacting business that presented itself. But while conducting a piece of public business in 78, Sulla was suddenly stricken. A local magistrate had been caught embezzling money from the city treasury, and while Sulla yelled at the thief, something ruptured inside his body and he spurred blood out of his mouth. Almost certainly caused by liver failure or a huge ulcer, Sulla collapsed in a heap of blood and bile and was carried back home where he spent a night of wretchedness. By morning, Lucas Cornelius Sulla was dead. When word of the dictator's death reached Rome, a debate erupted over how to respond. Some believed that it was already time to mark his career infamous and deny funeral rights. Sulla had murdered his fellow citizens and made himself tyrant. But Pompey stepped forward and retorted that he believed that a great man like Sulla deserved an elaborate public funeral, and he couldn't believe it was even a question. The elaborate funeral was duly staged. But the debate over Sulla's legacy was only beginning. In later years, what one thought of Sulla spoke volumes about one's character. Sulla's ashes were laid in an ancestral tomb and a monument to him was erected in the Compass Martius. His enduring credo was emblazoned on the monument for all time. No friend ever surpassed him in kindness and no enemy in wickedness. The Sulla in Constitution did not survive. In the first years of the New Regime, the senior Sulla leaders who took over Rome, Madalys Pius, Ampion Crassus chief among them, scrupulously followed Sulla's Constitution. But as the memory of Sulla faded, a new political rivalries emerged. These leaders abandoned the Sulla Decrees whenever expedient. In the end, it turned out Sulla's quote unquote final settlement was just another milestone on the Republic's road to ruin. One of the reasons Sulla's Constitution fared so poorly was that those who supported it did so mildly, and those who hated it did so passionately. Sulla's prescriptions had left a mob of enemies in their wake. After the killing was over, the dictator Sulla barred their sons and grandsons from running for office. These families were among the most prominent in Rome and cutting off their access to public office so permanent resentment. Many of them joined an aborted revolt against Sulla's Constitution, led by the consul Lepedes in 78. The revolt was quickly suppressed, but it showed how tenuous the piece really was. Even when the ban on the prescribed families was lifted and they were allowed to return to public life, it was certainly not with the same veneration for Republican morality, and certainly with no respect for Sulla's Constitution. The law curtailing the power of the tribunes lasted barely a decade. Despite Sulla's efforts, the popularity path the power was still a viable option, and leaders curried favor with the people throughout the 70s by promising to restore the tribunes to their full dignity. The men who finally capitalized on this popular promise were Pompey and Crasus, who restored the ancient power of the tribunes during their shared consulship in 70. In that same year, the Prytor, Luquias Aurelius Cota, passed a law undoing Sulla's judicial laws and opening the jury pool to both the Senate and Equestrians. Sulla's attempt at Italian land redistribution fared no better. Just as had happened with the Grocken program, within a generation, Sulla's veterans had mostly sold their land to rich magnates, and the end result was the Italian peninsula being dominated by larger states like never before. The provisional reorganization was similarly inadequate. Even with Sulla's expanded roster of magistracies, the Roman Empire was still only run by perhaps a hundred men. It was not until the Augustan settlements that something resembling a permanent bureaucracy stabilized the corrupt and inadequate provisional administration. No one was more to blame for the failure of the Sulla in constitution than Sulla himself. The facts of Sulla's career spoke louder than his constitutional musings. As a young man, he had flouted traditional rules of loyalty and deference to spread his own fame. When insulted, he marched legions on Rome. While abroad, he ran his own military campaigns and conducted his own diplomacy. When challenged back in Rome, he launched a civil war, declared himself dictator, killed his enemies, and then retired to get drunk and splendid luxury. The biography of Sulla drowned out the constitution of Sulla. And the men who followed him paid attention to what could be done, rather than what should be done. In the final analysis, Sulla's attempt to restore the republic was doomed because he misdiagnosed the problem. In Sulla's estimation, the political upheavals that racked Rome from the time of his birth in 138 until his death in 78 were the result of the Senate losing their dominant position. But what he did not realize is that the senatorial domination he had grown up with was a recent development. In fact, that domination was a leading cause of the problem, not a solution. Sulla thought he was resetting the constitutional balance to its natural state. Instead, he was just winding back the clock on a ticking time bomb. As would be predicted by Polybius' constitutional theory, the restored domination of the senatorial oligarchy provoked popularic demagogues, leading to an even more ferocious series of civil wars in the 40s and 30s. But Polybian theory did not hold for long. The fall of the senatorial oligarchy was precipitated by rhetorical populists, but their aim was never democracy, nor did democracy follow. Instead, weary of a generation of civil war, the Romans moved directly to the stable hand of an enlightened monarch. Unlike Sulla, however, when Augustus ascended to sole power, he did not retire. So in the end, Sulla's constitution did not lead to the permanent triumph of the aristocratic element, but rather the permanent triumph of the monarchical element. Though there never would be another king of Rome, there would be emperors, and they would rule Rome for a very long time. The core of the future Cessarian coalition that would reduce the senate to attire some social club was rooted in the old grok and coalition of rural peasants, lebsurbana, public-conny merchants, and renegade nobles. Mixing popularic rhetoric with direct appeals to self-interest, the Caesars would be able to harness these powers to finally destroy the semitoral aristocracy. But that did not mean every member shared equally in the spoils. The original demographic tapped by the grokens was the rural poor. The small farmers had been the focus of reform efforts going back to Tiberius Grokens' original lexagraria. The grokai had tried to rebuild the population of small farmers by redistributing agar-publicist poor citizens. But within a generation, the rich had bought back all the plots. Guyus Marius addressed the problem by recruiting landless plebs into the armies and then discharging them with land in the province in which they had fought. Marian colonies now existed in Africa, Sicily, and Gaul. Sola then attempted one last redistribution of Italian land, but as we just saw, this redistribution also failed. The economic momentum towards sprawling Latifundia was by then inexorable. The solution to the problem of the small farmer in Italy was only solved when they were all dead. The plebserbana, meanwhile, grew in numbers and strength. As the dislocations in rural Italy continued, migration to the cities began in earnest. By the age of Augustus, the population of Rome had ballooned to 750,000. During the Imperial Golden Age in the 100s AD, it went over a million. The growth of Rome is partly attributable to the expansion of the grain-doll. The subsidized grain supply, introduced by Guyus Grochis, became a permanent feature of Roman municipal policy. But it is important to remember that the grain-doll only applied to male citizens and only entitled those citizens to a subsistence ration. So though the idleness of the plebserbana was a frequent complaint, true idleness would have been fatal. For the rest of the republic and the entirety of the Imperial Age, feeding the plebserbana a stable supply of cheap grain was a routine part of municipal administration. The grain-doll helped create stability, as welcome to the rulers as to the rule. Benefiting most from the triumph of the Caesars were the equestrians. Under the death of Sulla, Rome only continued to expand and open new opportunities for business. As the principal merchants of the most dominant power in the Mediterranean, the equestrians controlled huge quantities of wealth. When Augustus imposed his imperial settlement in the 20s, he used men of equestrian rank to fill his growing provincial bureaucracy. In Egypt, Augustus would not even let a man of senatorial rank enter. Under Augustus' regime, the governor of Egypt had to be a man of equestrian rank. The equestrians would go on to manage the empire for the next 500 years. One pillar of the original Groc and Coalition that had triumphed already was the Italians. The Italian question had been answered when Sulla accepted unqualified sebatoss and safragium in the spring of 83. Now full in equal citizens, every Italian was legally indistinguishable from a Roman. Prosperous Italian equestrians became prosperous Roman equestrians. Powerful Italian leaders became powerful Roman leaders. There was, of course, always lingering social elitism. To the snobs of the Palatine Hill, a man like Cicero would always be a novice homo-italian. This snobbery would persist for a thousand years, but was legally meaningless. Rome was Italy, and Italy was Rome. So planting the Italians as Rome's second class citizens would be the foreign provincials. Republican governors continued to pump the provinces for money, much of which went to fund factional politics back in Rome. This problem was not solved until the Augustus settlements of the 20s B.C. With Augustus claiming supreme pro-consular authority outside Italy, his provinces were run by stable groups of equestrian administrators, operating under Augustus' personal sovereignty. Recognizing that the provincials were just as deserving of good government as the Italians, Augustus dialed back the haphazard exploitation and created a self-perpetuating balance between power and mercy. The Emperor Tiberius would chide an overzealous governor. It was the part of a good shepherd to shear his flock, not skin it. Oddly enough, the issue of provincial citizenship never became a major object of conflict. After the unification of Italy, the other provincial centers in Spain, Greece, and Africa remained merely subjects of Rome. This was a pattern that continued as Rome expanded into Gaul and Syria. But individuals could be awarded citizenship, the legions in particular became a frequently trot path, and soon there were Roman citizens of Spanish, Gallic, African, Greek, and Syrian origin. But mass provincial citizenship was never considered until the 3rd century AD, and even then was imposed from the top down. With many non-citizens exempt from certain taxes, the Emperor Caracalla decreed universal citizenship in 211. As the historian Cache's dio says, nominally he was honoring them, but his real purpose was to increase his revenues. So mass provincial citizenship was only extended once it became a burden rather than a privilege. These groups re-entered the historical stream after the death of Sella and proceeded to get back to the business of jockeying for power. The brief revolt led by the popularic consul lepedus in 78 reminded everyone how volatile the situation remained. The provinces of Spain also remained in open wound. Having escaped Italy, Quintus Sertorius established a base in Iberia and kept up the war against the Sullans even after the heads of all his former compatriots rotted in the forum. Joined by other marian exiles fleeing the prescriptions, Sertorius spent 10 years keeping the war alive. Both medalist Pius and Pompi failed to subdue him. When Pompi got sick of being stuck in the Spanish quagmire, he extracted himself by orchestrating the assassination of Sertorius in 72. This was the last fire of a conflagration that had begun with the social war nearly 20 years earlier. Meanwhile, the victorious Sullans fractured. Sertorius pious, Pompi and Crasus withdrew to their respective corners and pursued their own agendas. Crasus and Pompi in particular detested each other. When Spartacus raised his final great slave revolt that consumed Italy in 73-72, Crasus was the one who finally ended the uprising. But to Crasus' fury, Pompi managed to swing back from Spain to feed the last remaining cohort of renegade slaves and take credit for truly ending the conflict. The bitter rivalry of Crasus and Pompi helped define the next 20 years of Roman politics. But between Crasus and Pompi rose an ambitious young noble who would outshine them both, Gaius Julius Caesar. Having survived the prescription, Caesar emerged in the 70s as an ambitious young political talent. In 69, he took the provocative step of openly mourning the death of his aunt Julia, the wife of Gaius Marius. During her funeral procession, Caesar displayed images of Marius for the first time since Sullan's dictatorship. It annoyed the optimantes in the Senate, but it ginned up a wave of papularia sympathy for Marius, whom they had once called the third founder of Rome. This helped pave the way for the ban on prescribed families being lifted. But those who had felt the indignity of the prescription formed an unspoken bond, and an affinity for papularia politics. Caesar skillfully exploited their lingering resentment. While the noble's font, Rome continued to expand. The war with Mithraddadi's had never really ended. Undeterred by his earlier defeat, Mithraddadi's launched a series of major wars against Rome that lasted all the way until his death at the hands of Pompey the Great in 63. With Mithraddadi's finally defeated, Pompey took the legions on a grand tour of the Eastern Mediterranean, organizing the east into a network of allied client kingdoms. When Pompey returned to Rome, Caesar successfully reconciled Pompey and Crasseys, and together, they formed a secret alliance called the first triumvirate that would dominate Rome for the next decade. The triumvirate awarded land to Pompey's veterans, approved a war in Syria for Crasseys, and made Caesar pro-concil of Gaul. While Pompey remained in Rome, Caesar successfully conquered all of modern France. Crasseys, meanwhile, was led into an ambush in Syria and died a gruesome death in 53. The death of Crasseys broke the alliance between Caesar and Pompey, and the political factions re-aligned again for a final showdown in the 40s. Pompey lined up with the Okdemates and the Senate. Caesar lined up with his own network of Papulari partisans and loyal veterans. After crossing the Rubicon in 49, Caesar defeated all his enemies and had himself declared dictator for life, mocking Sulla by saying that Sulla did not know his ABCs when he laid down his dictatorship. Caesar clearly did not plan to relinquish the dictatorship, so a gang of senators led by Brutus and Cassius murdered him in 44. After the Ides of March, Caesar's heirs, Octavian and Mark Antony, combined to defeat the remnants of the Senate, and then waged a civil war against each other for control of the Empire. Victoria's over all his enemies, Octavian transformed himself into Augustus in 27, the Roman Republic transformed into the Roman Empire. Augustus's imperial settlement was premised on the accumulation of all sovereign authority in the hands of one man. The Centurion Assembly elected Augustus Consul, so he held Consular Authority. The Poblian Assembly simultaneously elected him Tribune, so he held Tribunition Authority. With that authority, Augustus could veto any bill and was immune from physical attack. The Senate also granted him Pro-Consular power in all the provinces, making him commander in chief of almost all of Rome's armed forces. In time, he also became Pontifex Maximus and controlled the priesthoods and temples. Augustus maintained the charade of republican government throughout his reign. Agustus also met regularly with the senior council of senators to give them the appearance of equal participation. Augustus never created a new office of Emperor. That is simply the label later Romans gave to the bound together fascist of individual sovereign powers now collectively vested in the hands of one man. Augustus himself preferred to be called simply princaps, the first citizen among equals. But underneath the charade of republican ritual, the monarchical element of the Polybian Constitution had permanently triumphed. Still, contrary to Polybius' theory, the triumph of the Caesars did not inevitably lead to an aristocratic response. The imperial administration created by Augustus entered a mode of permanent self-propeptuation, provincials and equestrians thrived under the new order, and if a few senators lost power, so what? Inside the senate, there was hope that the old republic would be revived, but the republic was never coming back. Sala died in 78, believing he had breathed new life into the republic. But what looked like the dawning of a new age was really the last moments of light before the Roman republic disappeared over the horizon. This has been a hashto audio production of The Storm Before The Storm, the beginning of the end of the Roman republic, written and read by Mike Duncan, directed by Ron Butler, produced by Dennis K.O. and Lisa Cahn. Recorded at Paradigm Productions, Madison, Wisconsin. Post-production by A1 Sound Studio. This program includes a Mac and PC compatible PDF. The Storm Before The Storm is available in print and digital formats from public affairs, an imprint of Perseus books, a division of Hashtet Book Group. For more Hashtet Audio Productions, visit us at HashtetAudio.com. Thank you for listening. Text Copyright 2017 by Mike Duncan. Audio Production Copyright 2017 Hashtet Audio. All rights reserved. Hashtet Book Group supports the right to free expression and the value of copyright. The purpose of copyright is to encourage writers and artists to produce the creative works that enrich our culture. The duplicating, uploading, and distribution of this audiobook without permission is a theft of the author's intellectual property. If you would like permission to use material from the audiobook, other than for review purposes, please contact permissions at hbgusa.com. Thank you for your support of the author's rights.