 3. Dagger's in the Forum Citizens were not called good or bad, according to their public conduct, because in that respect they were all equally corrupt, but those who were wealthiest and most able to inflict harm were considered good, because they defended the existing state of affairs. Solest Guy's Grokis had a dream. In this dream, he was visited by the ghost of his dead brother Tiberius who said, however much you may try to defer your fate, nevertheless you must die the same death that I did. Another version of the dream has Tiberius asking, why do you hesitate, guys? There is no escape. One life is fated for us both, and one death has champions of the people. Guy's like to tell the story of his dream because it gave the impression that he was not just another politician indulging in personal ambition. Instead he was being called to public service by a higher power. But though he feigned humility, it is clear that from a young age, Guy's Grokis aimed to become the greatest Grokis of them all. Though they were raised in the same house, by the same mother, and with the same tutors, the personalities of Tiberius and Guy's could not have been more different. Plutarch makes much of their divergent temperaments, where Tiberius was gentle and sedate. Guy's was high strung and vehement. Guy's lived simple and plain, while Guy's was ostentatious and festitious. When speaking in public, Tiberius relied on quiet empathy, while Guy's exuded exaggerated charisma. Guy's saw his older brother for the last time in the spring of 134 PC. Twenty-year-old Guy's departed for his first campaign in Spain, believing that the family was on the cusp of greatness. His older brother was preparing to introduce the Lexigraria and vault the next generation of Grokai to the forefront of Roman politics. But while in Spain, Guy's learned that it had all gone terribly awry. Tiberius had carried the Lexigraria, but he had paid for the victory with his life. Guy's return to Roman 132. It had been less than a year since Tiberius's death, and Guy's now found himself not just the patriarch of the household, but also expected to be the leader of a political movement his brother had started. This took his first step onto the public stage a few months later when he was called to defend a family friend in court. The power of Guy's oratory was the stuff of instant legend. Guy's pioneered a new form of theatrical oratory. He was the first Roman to pace the rostra energetically and pull his toga off his shoulder as he spoke. Even Cicero, an unrelenting critic of the Grokai, the reckon that Guy's was the finest order of his generation. How great was his genius, how great his energy, how impetuous his eloquence, so that all men grieve that all those good qualities and accomplishments were not joined to a better disposition and to better intentions. Guy has also had a hand in changing speech making from an aristocratic to a democratic form for speakers ought to address themselves to the people and not to the Senate. We do not have any record of this first great speech. The only thing we do know is that Guy's performance made the other orators appear to be no better than children. He was just 22 years old. The following year, Guy's continued to put his oratory to use in defense of his family's legacy. He publicly supported Carbo's bill to retroactively legitimize Tiberius' attempt at re-election. Though the bill failed, Guy's performance put the political elite on notice that Tiberius would not be the only Grokas to be reckoned with. Indeed, the leading nobilees began to fret about the power of Guy's, and there was a general consensus that he must not be allowed to become a Tribune. The nobles were right to fret because the visit from his dead brother was not the only dream Guy's had. Over the past century, the Republic had undergone a massive transformation without any comprehensive attempt to refit the ship of state to survive the new waters within which it sailed. Tiberius had proposed a single piece of radical agrarian legislation to blunt the effects of rising economic inequality, Guy has dreamed of an entire slate of reforms to ameliorate the most destabilizing aspects of Rome's imperial expansion. Guy's Grokas had a dream, and this dream would lead him to share one life with his brother, and die a champion of the people. While Guy has put together the early pieces of his reform package, one thing had already become clear, the future of Rome lay in Italy. As his brother had likely recognized in the early draft of the lexagraria, restoring the health of the Republic meant restoring the health of all Italians, not just Roman citizens. It was time to stop treating the Italian allies as foreigners, rather than what they really were, integral members of the Roman community. The loose Roman-led confederation that had knitted the peninsula together over the last 200 years was exhausted. With the Mediterranean now revolving around Italy, it was time for the peninsula to unify. In the years after Tiberius's death, fellow land commissioner Marcus Fulvius Flakis had become something of an older brother to Guy's. While Guy's was just starting his public career, Flakis was on the cusp of a consulship. When it came time to run, he introduced a provocative idea that he most likely discussed with Guy's in advance, to make every Italian a full Roman citizen. While this proposal had enormous long-term implications, it was premised on the more immediate and practical concern of resolving disputes with the land commission. Flakis believed that the Italian allies should be admitted to Roman citizenship so that, out of gratitude, they might no longer quarrel about the land. And though their gratitude was key, even more important, was that by accepting citizenship, the legal roadblock that had stalled the agrarian commission would be resolved. Flakis and Guy's both believed the Italians would make that deal. Offering the Italians' full citizenship was, of course, a radical proposition that sent shivers up the spines of the conservative nobility in Rome. They could not stand the thought of their subjects becoming their equals. But Flakis also ran into difficulty with the common plebsurbanah, who jealously guarded the privileges of citizenship. To guard against the proposal, the Senate induced a Tribune to expel all non-citizens from Rome in preparation for the consular election. If Flakis wanted to win on a platform of citizenship for the Italians, he was going to have to sell it to the Roman citizens. Periodic expulsions of foreigners became a recurring feature of the later republic, and Cicero deplored the practice saying, it may not be right for one who is not a citizen to exercise the rights and privileges of citizenship, but actually expelling non-Romans was, contrary to the laws of humanity. If Flakis won the consulship anyway, and in January 125 he unveiled his plan for Italian citizenship. But though he was now consul, Flakis still had the problem of convincing the assembly to vote it into law, especially since now only Romans were present in the city. It is difficult to say what would have happened had the bill actually come to a vote, but fortunately for the Senate an opportunity arose to deflect Flakis' attention. This from the Allied Greek city of Missilia, modern Marseille in France, arrived in Rome to complain about marauding Gallic tribes. The Senate assigned Flakis to go repel the attackers. Either because he sensed that his bill wasn't going to pass, or because he prioritized military glory over social reform. Flakis left for Gaul and did not return to Rome before his consulship expired. The bill for Italian citizenship expired with his consulship. Flakis would be the first step in a long and torturous battle for full Italian citizenship that would not end until 30 years later, and then only after hundreds of thousands late dead and the republic itself was nearly extinguished by civil war. When the Italian citizenship bill died, at least one Italian city did not take the news well. In late 125, the city of Frigelle, I went into revolt. A former Roman colony that had been planted in 328 during the heat of the Samnight Wars, Frigelle I had subsequently stayed loyal to Rome during the long struggle against Hannibal. The city was in fact noted for its exemplary service against the Carthaginians. Citizens of Frigelle I destroyed a key bridge to Stimie Hannibal's advance in 211 and then resisted pressure to capitulate even after Hannibal laid waste to their farms in retaliation. For their steadfast loyalty, the senate included them among those cities by whose aid and sucker the dominion of Rome was upheld. The details of the Frigelle I revolt are practically non-existent, but it was not considered threatening enough to demand consular attention. Instead, the senate dispatched Priteor Glucius Opimius to end the rebellion in early 124. As Roman leaders go, Opimius was forged from a particularly brutal mold. This proceeded to sack and demolish Frigelle I so that of the city whose brilliance but yesterday irradiated Italy, scarce the debris of the foundations now remains. The brutality of the sack was possibly a direct warning to other Italian cities who might in the future think of following Frigelle I's lead. Future Romans would link the destruction of Frigelle I to the string of demolished cities that stood as bare witnesses to Rome's expanding imperial self-confidence. By the Roman people, Numanthia was destroyed, Carthage raised, Corinth the Mawished, Frigelle I overthrown. But when Opimius returned to Rome, the senate denied his request for a triumph. They felt that while the object may have been to Caldhe Italians rubbing their noses in it was a bit over the top. Opimius's brutal suppression of Frigelle I turned out to be only the first example of the cold-blooded tactics he was willing to employ in defense of the existing order. Opimius would be elected consul in 121 and take center stage in the final showdown of the Grocken revolution, a revolution that reignited just as Opimius returned home from the sack of Frigelle I. Guy's Grockus was not in Rome as this drama played out. He was elected Quistor in 126 and posted to the island of Sardinia where he continued to make a name for himself. The winter of 126 to 125 was particularly hard, and the legionary suffered badly from a lack of proper supplies and clothing. The Roman governor forcibly requisitioned material from the towns of Sardinia to feed and clothe his men. But when the Sardinian sent an embassy to Rome to complain, the senate cancelled the requisitions and ordered the governor to supply his men some other way. This, some other way, turned out to be Guyus Grockus making a circuit of the island during which he used the full power of his persuasive oratory to convince the Sardinians to supply the Romans of their own free will. The Sardinians were convinced and contributed voluntarily. When the senate heard of Guyus' successful campaign, they did not congratulate him so much as fret over what would happen when his persuasive brand of charismatic oratory returned to the forum. So they conspired to keep him in Sardinia for as long as possible. He was perfectly normal for a consul to transition into a pro-consul when his annual term of office expired, and it was also normal for his staff to stay on with him. So the senate extended the Sardinian command for another year, and Guyus remained in Sardinia. But then the following year, the senate extended everyone again, which was highly irregular. Not since the Punic Wars had such multiple extensions been necessary, and with Sardinia peaceful and subdued, it was a curious decision. The Guyus suspected that the extensions had less to do with the necessity of keeping the consul in Sardinia, than with keeping Guyus Grakis out of Rome. So to counter these highly irregular orders, Guyus broke out a highly irregular response. Ignoring the most myorum that a staff officer was obligated to stay with his commander for the duration of their provincial assignment, Guyus simply packed up his belongings and headed back to Rome in the spring of 124. The senate was outraged at his unexpected appearance in the city, seeing happy throngs of cheering citizens greet him at the docks, only darkened their mood. But though their plan to trap Guyus since Sardinia had failed, that did not mean conservatives were going to let him waltz into the tribune on a post. Immediately upon his return, Guyus was hauled before the censors to answer for the abandonment of his commander. It was while defending himself from this charge that Guyus delivered one of his most famous speeches. With his honor besmirched, he defended his conduct in Sardinia, saying that while others used their provincial postings to oppress the locals and make themselves rich, when I left for Rome, I brought back empty from the province the purses which I took their full of money. Others have brought home overflowing with money, the jars which they took to their province, filled with wine. This was appointed rejoinder to the men accusing him of civic immorality, many of whom had indeed spent their service abroad drinking wine and filling the empty bottles with treasure. There were limits though to the powers of the censors to punish Guyus for his alleged transgressions. It is possible however that the moral approbation was meant to merely lay the groundwork for a more serious charge, one that would be heard in a criminal court. During up a vague Italian conspiracy theory, Guyus's enemies accused him of helping foment the rebellion of Frigalai. Guyus' pro-Italian bias would have been well known by now, and conservative senators tried to link that bias to actual treason against the Senate and people of Rome. The charges were of course ridiculous, as Guyus had been in Sardinia for the whole length of the uprising, but they still created a scandalous cloud that forced Guyus to respond. But we know that Guyus successfully dodged the accusations and began campaigning for his destined tribute. The tribute election for 123 was particularly fierce as the bulk of the nobles organized their clients to oppose Guyus' election. But the broad popularity of the Groc-I name and the power of Guyus' oratory were irresistible. Citizens poured into Rome from the surrounding countryside, and in the days leading up to the election, there was not housing enough for all of them. Even the wide open compass martias was soon overcrowded to the point where men occupied the rooftops. While Guyus campaigned, a bill came before the assembly to finally ratify the settlement of Asia that had been engineered by Aquilius. Ten years had now passed since the death of King Autilus, and the settlement of Asia was only just now ready for ratification. It had run into an unexpected delay when reports of Aquilius' shameful conduct filtered back to Rome. Among other things, Aquilius stood accused of taking bribes from King Mithridades V of Pontus to settle the border to Mithridades' advantage. Since the charges were 100% true, all signs pointed to an open and shut conviction. But instead, the jury acquitted Aquilius. This was partly thanks to the incomparable oratory of Marcus Antonius, a rising young star who defended Aquilius in court. But it was also thanks to the money Aquilius spread among the jurors, essentially using bribed money to bribe his way out of accusations of bribery. After the scandal died down, the final bill to ratify Aquilius' settlement of Asia came before the assembly, and Guyus came out strongly in opposition. So there was anything particularly objectionable in the administrative regime established by Aquilius is lost to history, and likely beside the point. Guyus not only wanted to use the issue of Asia to lambast the corruption of the Senate, but he had his own plans for how to settle Asia and wanted to ensure he had a clean slate to work with. But while the issue of Asia made for good anti-senatorial father, there was no issue Guyus exploited more than the tragic story of his brother. More your eyes, he would say. These men beat Tiberius to death with clubs, and his dead body was dragged from the capital through the midst of the city to be thrown into the tibre. Those of his friends who were caught were put to death without trial. And though much of this was intentionally manipulative, there is no reason to think it was pure cynicism. Tiberius had been murdered by powerful men who had escaped punishment. No Roman would ignore the chance to settle matters of family honor, especially in such a public way. When election day came, Guyus was elected easily, and upon taking office in December 124, the force of his reputation and power of his ambition made him indisputably the first of all the tribunes. The breadth and depth of Guyus' reform package was unprecedented. After what must have been years of careful preparation, Guyus Grockus entered the tribune of 123, the multifaceted platform designed to appeal to different interest groups. If enacted in full, that platform would curb the power of the Senate and restore the balance of the Polybian Constitution. It was later said that when Guyus was done, he left nothing undisturbed, nothing untouched, nothing unmolested, nothing in short, as it had been. But before he could get to ambitious socio-political reform, Guyus had some family business to settle. The first bill he introduced was aimed squarely at Octavius, the tribune whose obstinacy had contributed so much to Tiberius' death. Guyus introduced a bill making it illegal for a man to post from office by the assembly to serve as a magistrate ever again. If enacted, this would end Octavius' public career. But famously, Cornelia interceded and Guyus withdrew the bill, which some historians have suggested may have been a stage-managed affair to establish Grocken benevolence while slightly confirming the principle that the assembly could depose a magistrate if it wanted to, which was still not yet an established point of law. Guyus' next aim for the men who had persecuted his brother's followers. Guyus claimed that the extraordinary tribunal of 132 had violated the assembly supremacy in capital cases. To make sure it never happened again, Guyus introduced a bill saying that the Senate could only convene a tribunal after receiving permission from the assembly. The Senate would never again be able to repeat the repressive tribunal of 132. But the new law went further than simply ensuring such tribunals would be illegal in the future. Guyus' law was also retroactive. There was no prohibition against expost facto legislation of this kind, and a person could find themselves guilty of breaking a law that did not exist at the time of the alleged crime. For example, Repilius and Linus, the two consuls who had led the tribunal in 132. By the time Guyus was passing this expost facto law, Repilius was already dead, but his colleague Linus was alive and well. In the law passed, tearful friends accompanied Linus to the gates of Rome, and he departed for exile. With family business settled, Guyus moved swiftly to implement his reforms. First up was restarting the work of the land commission. The commission still technically existed, and Guyus, Blackis and Carbo were all still commissioners, but their work had been stalled for years by the Senate decree that consuls had jurisdiction over disputes with the Italians. Blackis had tried to circumvent the problem by making the Italians' full-roman citizens, and when that failed, the commission remained in dry dock. Guyus cut through the legal red tape by passing a bill establishing that the land commissioners had final jurisdiction over all disputed boundaries. The rural poor had always been the bedrock of Grocken's support, and they thrilled that the idea that more Agare Publicus could now be identified and parcel out. But Guyus now wanted to do much more than settle landless plebs on small private plots. He wanted to create whole new communities. Guyus envisioned a whole network of new colonies in Italy, stretching from atroria in the north, all the way down to Tarantum in the south. All the colonies would be situated on good harbors and improve trade in and out of the Italian interior. To fill these colonies, Guyus would not just need landless peasants, but also rich equestrians, who would become the principal merchants of the new colonies. Profits both in trade and state contracts to build the roads and streets and harbors made his colonization project attractive to everyone. He even dreamed of overseas expansion, targeting the great harbor of vanquished carfages, the perfect location for a permanent Roman colony. Guyus also launched a broad project to improve and extend the roads of Italy, introducing for the first time uniform methods and specifications. Guyus' roads became known for their utility and elegance. They were made from good stone laid on tightly packed sand. They were of uniform height and width and equipped with excellent drainage systems. Guyus also ordered the work crews to mark each mile with a stone pillar, so travelers could calculate distances easier. In the long run, Guyus' roads helped improve lines of communication, supply, and trade. And for short-term political purposes, the roads promised profits for public-cony contractors and steady work for rural laborers. Since this road work would occur way off in the rural hinterlands, it offered little for the plebserbana of Rome. So to secure their support, Guyus promised them what they always wanted, a stable supply of cheap grain. Just as Guyus was coming to office, a plague of locusts decimated crops in North Africa, causing food shortages back in Rome. Guyus introduced legislation directing the state to purchase and stockpile grain and then sell it to citizens for a fixed price. Cicero later denounced the project as an obvious handout to secure political support and said that better men at the time resisted it because they thought that its effect would be to lead the common people away from industry to idleness. But this was not the free grain-doll that would become a hallmark of imperial municipal policy. It was simply offering grain at a fixed price to create some semblance of stability. The plebserbana loved the bill so much they made further expansion of subsidized grain, their central political demand for the next hundred years. Guyus then introduced measures to redress thirty years of complaints about the ruinous cost of service in the legions. The state had provided arms, equipment and clothes for the legions through the public-cony contractors, but always deducted expenses from a soldier's pay, a ruinous burden for the already impoverished legionaries. Guyus passed a law that the state would stop deducting the expenses. As with the evolution of the grain-doll, it would take a century to move from the ad-hoc armies of the middle republic to the permanent legions of Augustus. But Guyus' law to move expenses from the citizens' pockets to the state treasury was a big step. Finally, Guyus put the capstone on his project with two major pieces of legislation in support of the equestrians generally, but more specifically, the public-cony. The first, addressed an issue Guyus had already campaigned against, Aquilius' settlement in Asia. All the old royal domains had now been converted into Roman Aguerre publicists and were available for taxation, the profits from which would be astronomical. But a controversial clause in the settlement stipulated that tax-farming contracts for Asia would be sold by the Roman governor in Asia, giving the governor control over the flow of enormous wealth. Guyus passed a law stipulating that Asian tax-farming contracts would be sold by the censors back in Rome. It was billed as a measure to curb senatorial power, but it also ensured the largest and most powerful of the public-cony companies would be able to monopolize the business. This earned Guyus backing from some of the richest and most influential men in Rome, who were already impressed with Guyus' public works projects. These men were not yet part of the political power structure, but were fast being integrated into the system. Guyus helped further politicize the public-cony with his second major piece of legislation, reform of the extortion court. The jury pool of the extortion court had always been drawn from the Senate, and the senatorial jurors had long turned a blind eye to each other's misdeeds. These were, after all, the jurors that had just found Aquilius innocent despite clear evidence of his guilt. Guyus passed a law that barred senators from serving on the jury. Instead, jurors would be drawn from the ranks of the equestrians, but not just any equestrians. To be available for jury duty, a man had to be permanently domiciled in Rome, since the official residence for the majority of equestrian families was their country of states, the only men permanently domiciled in Rome were those who supported themselves strictly through business, especially the public-cony. The public-cony now had a powerful mechanism to defend their own interests. When Guyus was done with all this legislation, he not only introduced reforms that anticipated by a hundred years, though stable imperial structure of Augustus, but it also put Guyus at the center of a powerful anti-senatorial coalition. The plebsurbana, the rural poor, the equestrians generally, and the public-cony particularly, were all now arrayed behind Guyus. His success would be their success, his ruin, their ruin. The coalition forged by Guyus would become familiar in years to come, as men like Marius, Baterninas, Druces, Sopickius, and Sinah would all use the same basic mix to pursue their own anti-senatorial agendas. As elections for the next year's Tribune approached, Guyus appeared ready to pass the baton to his old friend and ally, Flakis, to put himself forward as a candidate. Flakis running for Tribune was all on its own another chink in the unspoken armor of most myorom. A former consul had never before stood for the lesser office of Tribune. With the backing of Guyus, Flakis won election easily, but then, as a result either of careful planning, unexpected luck, or some combination of the two, Guyus himself won re-election to the Tribune. The very thing that had once been so controversial, it had literally gotten his brother killed. As shocking as it was, Guyus' re-election remains a historical mystery. We know that Guyus was still not technically a candidate when the elections occurred, but when the results came, a few of the ten Tribune slots remained vacant, and unusual, but not unheard of outcome. In such cases, it was the Tribune's prerogative to assign men to fill the vacant seats, and Guyus Grokis was among those appointed. The question is, how much of this drama was pre-engineered? Was the first vote manipulated to ensure open seats remained? Or was it the spontaneous work of the goddess Fortuna, and Guyus was as surprised as anyone to find himself re-elected? We do not know. We only know that Guyus was now Tribune for a second consecutive year. Guyus entered his second term at the peak of his powers. He was, closely attended by a throng of contractors, artificers, ambassadors, magistrates, soldiers, and literary men, with all of whom he was on easy terms. Thus, he was a more skillful popular leader in his private intercourse with men, and in his business transactions, than in his speeches from the Roastra. But there was a core of conservative senators opposed to him. This group had gotten steamrolled during Guyus' first term, but had regrouped for his second term. As had happened to Tiberius, Guyus' enemies tapped a rival tribute named Marcus Livius Drusus to do their dirty work. Drusus was himself a rising star in Roman politics. Like Guyus, he was eloquent, wealthy, and had been raised to expect a public career. But where Guyus sought advancement through popular reforms, Drusus planned to advance by blocking them. He entered office on a mission to undermine Guyus at every turn. If he was successful, he would gain powerful allies in the Senate. Drusus opened by offering a new colonization project of his own. Though Guyus's plan had until that point been the most ambitious colonization project in history, Drusus now promised 12 new colonies, each with generous land grants and startup capital for 3,000 colonists. Fully 36,000 families stood to benefit, and the news sent shockwaves through the population. Drusus also very carefully made sure everyone knew that only Roman citizens qualified for the new colonies. Italians would not be allowed. Drusus' clever dividing of Roman from Italian came just as Guyus was preparing to introduce the measure flakus had failed to carry during his consulship. Citizenship for the Italians. As a matter of principle and political interest, Guyus supported a broader franchise and had been a frequent spokesman on behalf of the Italians. Guyus proposed those with Latin rights be elevated to full Roman citizenship, while allies would be granted Latin rights. Guyus's bill fell short of blanket equality proposed in 125 by flakus, but this was a massive bomb to lob into the middle of the forum, especially as it came on the heels of Drusus' Romans only colonization project. Just as had happened during flakus' consulship, the Senate dealt with Guyus' call for Italian citizenship by once again expelling non-Roman Italians from entering the city in the run-up to the vote. The decree stated, nobody who does not possess the right of suffrage shall stay in the city or approach within five miles of it while voting is going on concerning these laws. Facing a population thoroughly hostile to the bill, Guyus let it die rather than risk his other plans. Other attempt at reform having failed, the issue of Italian citizenship would remain a persistent problem for the Romans, especially because the Italians were already detecting a pattern. Citizenship would be dangled only to be snatched away at the last minute. It was not a game that amused them. After losing the vote on Italian citizenship, Guyus sailed from North Africa in the spring of 122. The first of his colonies being built was the most controversial of all. Located on the side of Old Carthage, the colony would control a strategically advantageous port, but the superstitious Romans were wary of occupying haunted ground. Leaving flakus behind to mind-room, Guyus personally traveled to Carthage to oversee the founding of the colony. It's hard to say exactly why Guyus departed Rome at this moment. Perhaps it was because he felt that his presence during the building of the colony was important both practically and symbolically, but his support among the people would not hold in his absence. Guyus spent 70 days in Africa, and during those 70 days nothing went right. The survey team laying out the plots of land and design of the colony were plagued with problems. A post planted to mark the center of town was hit with a gust of wind and snapped. The end trails for required sacrifice were similarly scattered by winds. Then wolves set upon the boundary markers and carried them away. And to the superstitious Romans, these problems were not just setbacks. They were proof that the gods did not approve of Guyus' plans. The Senate would be able to use the reports of ominous portents to mount their final attack on Guyus and his followers. Meanwhile, back in Rome, those followers were dwindling by the day. Flakus was not nearly as deaf as Guyus when it came to politicking, and Drusus was running circles around him. With the fabled 12 colonies already making the Grocken program look stingy, Drusus announced that the land Guyus, Flakus and Carbo had distributed his land commissioners, which stipulated rent must be paid to the state, would now be rent-free. Drusus was successfully outflanking the Grocken's from the popular side, and Guyus was now painted as an ungenerous skinflint. Drusus returned after his two-month absence to find his political standing had plummeted. The people who once supported him now cheer Drusus. The stories that had come out of Carthage hinted that Guyus was now courting the wrath of the gods themselves. But Guyus refused to back down. When he returned, he vacated his house on the Palatine Hill and took up residence in a smaller house near the Forum. He would live among the people to try to prove that it was he, not Drusus, who had their interests at heart. To ensure the survival of his legislation, Guyus decided against all precedent to run for a third consecutive term. On election day, Guyus emerged with the necessary number of votes to secure re-election, but the observers who monitored the election tripped over themselves challenging Guyus' ballots, alleging that most were fraudulent and that the ballot box had been stuffed. It did not take long for the magistrates in charge of the election to agree, toss out most of Guyus' votes and declare him defeated. Guyus protested, but there was nothing he could do. The election results were verified, and that was that. When the new year arrived, Guyus was out of office, stripped of the immunity from prosecution and the sacrosanct protection from physical harm, left powerless and unprotected. He was about to be forced to watch his legislation die. Guyus' bat is losing the election in 121, was watching lukeous opimius win the consulship. An avowed enemy of the Grocki, newly elected consul opimius, made it his personal mission to destroy Guyus Grockis as he had once destroyed for Gell-Eye. Opimius' plan was not just to repeal the Grockin legislation, but also to provoke Guyus into doing something illegal that would justify prosecution and banishment. For his part, Guyus tried to avoid taking the bait, but when opimius let it be known that he was going to abandon the colony at Carthage, Guyus finally organized some of his old supporters to stage a demonstration. How much genuine support Guyus actually had left is unknown, and there is a passing hint in Plutarch that his mother Cornelia paid non-romance to sneak back into the city and support her son in his hour of need. On the morning that the fate of the colony was slated for debate, two rival factions filtered into the forum. While Guyus paced in an adjacent portico, Flakus delivered an energetic speech attacking the tyranny of opimius and the senate. With the Grockin faction riled up, one of opimius' servants started making his way through the crowd bearing the entrails for a sacrifice. Some reports state that the servant merely approached Guyus and begged him not to do anything that would destroy the republic. Plutarch however, says the servant pushed his way through the crowd, demanding that the Grockin rascals make way and cursing their impetuousness. Both versioned of the story end the same though. A band of Grockin supporters surrounded the servant. One of the Grockins then pulled out a writing-styleist that had been sharpened into a shiv and stabbed opimius' servant to death. When word of the murder filtered through the crowd, the forum erupted. In the ensuing commotion, Guyus berated his followers for giving the senate the excuse they needed to crack down and then rushed forward to try to explain that the murder of opimius' servant was not what had appeared. But no one wanted to hear it. In the chaos, no one could hear it. But a final confrontation was avoided when a heavy rain started to fall and it drove both sides out of the forum. As Guyus considered which way to run he cried, wither shall I unhappy wretch but take myself, wither shall I turn, to the capital but that is drenched with the blood of my brother, or to my home that I may see my distress and afflicted mother in all the agony of lamentation. The next day the consul convened the senate to discuss a response to the events of the previous day. Just as debate was beginning a din broke out in the forum. The funeral procession bearing opimius' murdered servant coincidentally arrived at the forum as the senate met. Emerging from the senate to view the procession, the senators denounced the reckless political violence of the Grocans and grieved for its victims. But pro-Grocans citizens present in the forum heckled the moralizing senators, asking why they were so worked up over a dead servant, when ten years earlier they had dumped the bodies of Tiberius Groccas and 300 of his followers into the tiber without a second thought. And by the crowd the senate gave opimius the authority he needed to restore order. They instructed opimius to do whatever he thought necessary to preserve the state. The intent of this vague decree was clearly to authorize opimius to act as a dictator would without resurrecting the cumbersome and archaic authority of the dictatorship itself. Though they did not know it at the time, the senate's improvised decree set a precedent for the future. In times of civil unrest, the senate would invoke the same formula, which became known as the Senatus Consultum Ultimum, the senate's final decree. Opimius promptly ordered every senator to provide two armed men from their households and muster them in the forum the next morning. Groccas spent his final night as his brother had, surrounded by bodyguards and partisans, knowing that a great confrontation loomed in the morning. Groccas had spent years telling people about his dream. However much you may try to defer your fate, the ghost of his brother told him, you must die the same death that I did. What had once been a stirring bit of propaganda now seemed morbidly specific. Flock has seemed unconcerned, even eager about the looming clash. He and his friends stayed up late drinking and boasting of the fight they would give the no good bastards in the morning. Gias was sober and somber. In the morning, Flock has had to be roused from a hungover stupor, but when he woke, he distributed weapons to the men from his own private collection. As they left the house, Gias had to disentangle himself from his wife, who begged him to stay. Not to the rostra, O Gias, do I now send you forth as formerly to serve as tribute and law-giver, nor yet to a glorious war, where should you die, you would at all events leave me in honored sorrow. Instead, he was exposing himself to men who likely aimed to murder him. The worst has at last prevailed. By violence and the sword, men's controversies are now decided. Why, pray, should men longer put faith in laws or gods after the murder of Tiberius? But Gias pushed his way past her. Honor would not be satisfied by staying home. The Groc infaction occupied the Aventine Hill, which lay across a shallow valley from the Palatine Hill, and long a poblean enclave going back to the founding of the city. Boccus was clearly spoiling for a fight, but Gias prevailed upon them all to give reason one last chance. They dispatched Boccus' young son, Quintus, to the forum to find out what, if anything, would diffuse the crisis. In the forum, Opimius waited with his forces arrayed. Reinforced by some auxiliary slingers and archers, recently returned from a campaign in the Balearic Islands. Opimius had at his command about 3,000 men. When Flocus' son arrived, Opimius told the young man that at a minimum the Grocins had to lay down their arms, come to the forum, and beg forgiveness. He also said that if the answer was anything less than total capitulation, the boy best not come back at all. Gias, for one, appeared ready to back down. But Flocus, and his more radical supporters, talked him out of it. During Opimius' threat, they sent Flocus' son back to reject the terms. Good to his word, Opimius arrested the young man, tossed him in jail, and then led his small army towards the Aventine. Before leaving, he offered a bounty of gold for the heads of Flocus and Gias. The amount of gold determined by the weight of the head. When Opimius' small legion ascended the Aventine, the archers lobbed arrows and the assembled Grocins were forced to disperse. In the chaos, they lost cohesion, and the strength they might have had in numbers never materialized. Just minutes into the fight, it was already every man for himself. Gias led a party to the nearby Temple of Diana, while Flocus went into hiding either in a vacant bath or the workshop of one of his clients. Opimius' men knew Flocus was somewhere in the area, but no one would identify which house he was in. When they threatened to burn the whole block down, someone came forward and ratted Flocus out. So it was that Marcus Folius Flocus, Senator, Consul, Tribune, and Citizen of Rome, was apprehended and summarily executed on a random street on the Aventine Hill. Guys meanwhile could see that it was all falling apart. Rumors flew that Opimius was now offering immunity to anyone who laid down their arms. The same cocky crew that had spent the night drinking and boasting now tossed down their weapons and begged for mercy. Gias' few remaining supporters urged him to run for it. So Gias ran for it. With a small handful of his most loyal friends, Gias ran from the Aventine down to a bridge across the Tiber. But a company of Opimius' men were in hot pursuit. As Gias fled across the Tiber, his loyal friends posted themselves at the head of the bridge to fight off their pursuers and give Gias time to get away. They were cut down to a man. Gias and a single slave made it as far as the sacred grove, an ancient patch of trees on the outskirts of Rome. It was there that Gias decided that he would run no more and that his time was at hand. Handing a dagger to his slave, Gias exposed his neck and ordered the slave to plunge the dagger into his throat. The slave obliged. Another Grocus now laid dead in a pool of blood. After his body was found, Gias' head was duly cut off and secured by a savvy former supporter. The erstwhile Grocken carried the head home and bored a hole in the neck and drawing out the brain poured in molten lead in its place. Then he carefully stuck the head of Gias on a spear and brought it to Opimius and when it was placed in a balance, it weighed 17 pounds and two thirds. Gias paid him in full. As with Tiberius, the day of sharp violence was followed by a more methodical purge. As many as 250 people died that same brutal morning as Gias and Flockus. But thousands more were identified and executed in the days to come as Opimius' rid Rome of Grocken partisans. Even the son of Flockus, arrested for being the messenger of his father, was only given the courtesy of choosing his method of death. Grocken faction was broken. Carbo, the last remaining Grocken land commissioner, only survived the purge by switching sides. He likely secured a consulship for 120 by promising to defend Opimius' conduct in front of the assembly. But since no one likes a traitor, Carbo was himself arraigned on vague charges of treason the minute he left office in 119. The prosecution was led by a rising young noble named Lucius Likinius Crasus. Just 20 years old, Crasus dazzled the crowd with incisive wit and eloquence that shredded Carbo's attempt to escape his past. Although Carbo, you defended Opimius, this audience will not on that account esteem you a good citizen. For it is clear that you disembled and had other views. For a decade, Carbo had been a radical Grocken. The last minute defense of Opimius didn't fool anyone. Loathed by all and his reputation destroyed, Carbo rescued himself from the severity of the judges by a voluntary death, as Cicero so eloquently put it. Guy's papyrus Carbo was the last victim of the Grocken purge. But though the Grocken were now dead, many of their reforms lived on. The extortion court remained staffed by equestrian jurors. The grain dull remained in place. And though for the moment it was merely a small price-controlled ration, it entered permanently into the fabric of Roman administration. The road building and public works continued, and though the colonies were never completed, any early colonists who had secured land was allowed to keep it. Drusus' magical 12 colonies were never heard from again now that Guy's headless body had been dumped in the tibre. As for the land commission, it remained existent but inert. Within a few years the assembly amended the Lexigraria to allow possessors of the Grocken allotments to sell their land. It did not take long for wealthy magnates to buy up the majority of the lots. By 111, a further law transferred all currently held Alguerra publicist to outright private property. The Lexigraria had been a creative attempt to solve the problem of widening inequality in Italy and reverse the gradual disappearance of the small Roman farmer, a problem that ultimately would not be solved until after the fall of the Republic. After their deaths, the Grocken brothers themselves were transformed into legendary martyrs of the people. The Romans erected statues of them where each had been slain. Citizens dropped offerings and sacrifices at these quasi-religious shrines. Their mother Cornelia was moved by the devotion and said, the sacred places where her sons had been slain were tombs worthy of the dead which occupied them. Cornelia herself retired to a villa at the port city of Misenum and lived for another 20 years. She maintained a running salon of Greek intellectuals and philosophers and welcomed visitors from all corners of the Mediterranean, including the kings from the Hellenic East. Of her sons, she always spoke without grief or tears and narrated their achievements and their fate as if she were speaking of men of the early days of Rome. Some found her calm demeanor off-putting, but as Plutarch says, while fortune often prevails over virtue when it endeavors to ward off evils, she cannot rob virtue of the power to endure those evils with calm assurance. When Cornelia died, the Romans built a statue of her in the forum. As the years passed, the Grocai name came to mean more than just the brothers. It stood for an array of programs and tactics that collectively represented a new Papulare movement in Roman politics. The standard Papulare programs included a grain doll for the urban poor, land for the rural poor, control of the courts with the equestrians, secret ballots in the assembly, subsidies for military service, and punishment of corrupt nobles. Tactically, the Papulare harness the democratic power of the assembly rather than the aristocratic weight of the Senate. Papulare leaders came and went, the citizens of Rome remained the same and would support those who offered them what they wanted. Opposing the Papulare's were the optimantes, meaning literally the best or the good, the term invoked a variety of characteristics. But since Cicero is our main source, those characteristics tended to align with his own worldview. For Cicero, an optimante was a well-educated senator with an active interest in oratory, politics and war, and skewing away from the severe Roman virtues and the mold of old Cato the Elder. An optimante senator was comfortable with exotic food and Greek ideas. These grandly sophisticated statesmen were the natural guardians of the Republic, standing as sentinels against enemies both foreign and domestic. For the great historian's solace, himself an active partisan in the politics of the late Republic, the divide between Papulare and optimante meant that the institution of parties and factions had come to Rome. He felt both sides were to blame for the treacherous polarization because the nobles began to abuse their position and the people their liberty. Thus the community was split into two parties, and between these the state was torn to pieces. But despite Solace's observation, the Romans did not have political parties in the modern sense. There was no Papulare party and optimante party. Tactics, strategies and alliances were fluid to all factions. But those Cicero deplored the tribunes and the assembly, his beloved optimante were just as adept at using the assembly to get their way as the Papulare. In fact, most of the greatest popular orders of the coming generation spoke on behalf of the optimante, rather than Papulare. But though there were no formal parties, it is true that there were now two broadly opposing world views floating in the political ether waiting to be tapped as needed. As the crisis over the Lexigraria revealed, it was no longer a specific issue that mattered, so much as the urgent necessity to triumph over rivals. Reflecting on the recurrent civil wars of the late republic, Solace said, it is this spirit which has commonly ruined great nations, when one party desires to triumph over another by any and every means and to avenge itself on the vanquished with excessive cruelty. Nothing to feet was no longer an option. In fact, the memories of that excessive cruelty doled out to the Grogens, lived on in the minds of those who had been witness to the methods of the noble optimantes. Though it was the Grogi who Cicero later accused of throwing daggers in the forum, it was the optimantes who had murdered thousands in the name of public order. Most insulting was the Senate's order to opimius to rebuild and refurbish the Temple of Concord, which had been damaged during the fighting in 121. The Temple was dedicated to the unity of the Roman people, but for many in Rome, calling a bloody purge the foundation of unity was an insult. After the restoration was complete, an anonymous vandal inscribed at the base of the Temple, a work of mad discord produces a Temple of Concord.