 Chapter 2 The Step Children of Rome For when those in power act cruelly and wickedly, the character of their subjects is inflamed to reckless action. If they are denied the kindness which they deserve, they revolt against the men who act like cruel despots. Deodorus The Year 132 BC dawned with the Senate ready to bury the revolution of Tiberius Grocos. The creative special commission whose purpose was to punish those who had supported Tiberius' illegal bid for monarchy. This commission would be led by the new consuls, Publius Repilius and Publius Papilius Linus, who were given the authority to pass capital sentences. But there were questions about the legality of this extraordinary tribunal. According to the ancient law of the Twelve Tables, laws concerning capital punishment of citizens shall not be passed except by the assembly. Neither the Senate nor the consuls had the right to bring capital charges against citizens on their own authority, but here they were doing it anyway. The populace was outraged at the brazen flouting of the law, and their outraged grue when only lower-class plebs or resident foreigners were targeted for prosecution. The aristocratic senators who had participated in the affair, for example, the authors had the lexigraria, were never called to account despite their central role in the crisis. For the next few weeks, the common people of Rome lived under the ominous shadow of the tribunal. Men were hauled before the consuls for the most tenuous connection to the Grocken movement. Some were executed, many more driven and exiled. If it was obnoxious to many that no senators were called to account for themselves, it was downright sacrilegious that Scipio Nosica still walked free. Nosica had done nothing less than orchestrate the murder of a sacrosanctribune, that he had yet faced no consequences was literally a crime against the gods. So Marcus Fulvius Flacas, a young reformist senator and ally of the Grocken's, announced his intention to bring Nosica to justice. Whatever they thought of Nosica's conduct, the Senate could not stand by while an angry mob prosecuted the Pontifex Maximus. Luckily, a convenient solution presented itself. With Piberius dead, the Senate had taken back control of the kingdom of Pergamum, and they named Nosica to an embassy that would travel to Pergamum, assess the situation, and begin the process of annexation. The Pontifex was in sense that he was being shuffled out the back door, but complied with the will of his colleagues. Nosica departed for the east, where he would live just long enough to witness a giant slave revolt before dying bitterly without any desire to return to his ungrateful country. Having defused this crisis, the Senate also refused to ignite a new one. They knew there were limits to how far they could go with their repressive antics, so they did not attempt to repeal the Lexigraria or to shut down the land commission. Either because they finally admitted the efficacy of reform, or because they believed that stopping the process now would spark a riot, the Senate allowed the commission to continue its work. They assigned Mukhi-Anas, one of the senatorial authors of the Lexigraria, to take Piberius' place on the commission alongside Claudius and young Gaius Grakis. The redistribution of Aguerre publicus continued. While all of this was unfolding in Rome, Scipio Amelionis was half a world away wrapping up the conquest of Numontia. He had arrived 18 months earlier and found the Spanish legions demoralized in Nurt and lacking discipline. Amelionis cleaned them up and ran them around on daily exercise to get them back into fighting shape. After a full year of preparation, Amelionis then called in the full weight of Rome's available manpower. In the spring of 133, more than 60,000 Italian, African and Spanish soldiers surrounded the pitiful city of Numontia, which was now manned by just 8,000 holdouts. In the face of this overwhelming force, the Numontines admitted defeat, despairing therefore by the escape and in revulsion of rage and fury, they made an end of themselves, their families and their native city with the sword, with poison and with general conflagration. When the few remaining traumatized survivors exited the gates, Amelionis ordered them thrown in chains and Numontia raised to the ground. Amelionis expected this victory to be the talk of Rome, but shortly after the fall of Numontia, word came of a major political crisis in Rome. After passing a controversial land bill, Tiberius Grakis and 300 of his followers had been killed and dumped in the timer. Amelionis did not respond diplomatically to the news. With the official story being that Tiberius had conspired to make himself a king, Amelionis responded with another dose of Homeric wisdom, so perish all those who attempt such crimes. But when Amelionis' Homeric quip landed back home, the streets murmured with this pleasure. Had Amelionis just sanctioned the murder of a Tribune? His own brother-in-law no less? The same people who had carried Amelionis to two extraordinary consulships now saw him as just another out-of-touch noble. Amelionis was oblivious to the shift in mood back in Rome, however, and continued to believe that thanks to his latest conquest, his star-burned brighter than ever. When he returned home in the summer of 132, he was shocked by the reception he received. Rather than adoring throngs, he found people in Rome glouring and standoffish. A distressed Amelionis hardly recognized the people that had unanimously elected him consul just two years earlier. This might have gone differently for Amelionis had he been able to lavishly spread the wealth from his conquest in Numontia. But unfortunately, there was no wealth to spread. Compared to his triumph after the sack of Carthage, Amelionis' new-maintain triumph was a pathetic affair. Few riches, few slaves, nothing exotic or beautiful or wondrous to behold. For all the lives that had been ruined in the Spanish Wars, it must have been infuriating to discover that all Rome had to show for it was a few trinkets and some gaunt spaniards. Shortly after Amelionis' meager triumph, a rising Grocken partisan named Gaius Papyrius Carbo was elected Tribune for 131. A passionate young reformer, Carbo introduced a bill that would extend the secret ballot to all legislative assemblies. If passed, it would complete the transformation of Roman voting from public voice to secret ballot, as all electoral, judicial, and legislative assemblies would now be secret. Carbo also introduced a bill to retroactively confirm the legitimacy of Tiberius' re-election bid to undercut the conservative argument that Tiberius' murder was justified because he broke the law. Believing that things were moving too far in a popular direction, Amelionis spoke in the form against Carbo's bill. He said the traditional prohibition on recurring office-holding was in keeping with Republican virtue, which must have struck the crowd as hypocritical since Amelionis had secured an exemption from those very same prohibitions. During one of Amelionis' public appearances, Carbo himself stepped forward to demand what Amelionis really thought about the murder of Tiberius. Amelionis said, if he intended to seize the state, he was killed justly. In the audience turned hostile, Amelionis returned the compliment. As he looked out at the angry mob, Amelionis did not see true Romans, but instead a gaggle of foreign interlopers, immigrants, freedmen and slaves who did not know what Roman virtue and dignity meant. How can I, he bellowed, who have so many times heard the battle shout of the enemy without feeling fear be disturbed by the shouts of men like you, to whom Italy is only a stepmother. Not surprisingly, this only led to further heckling and Amelionis' bitter withdrawal from the forum. The measures confirming the right of re-election did not pass, but the fight had done irreparable damage to Amelionis' reputation. In some ways, Amelionis was right about the crowd he faced in the forum that day. In the early days of Rome, there was no difference between the plebs or bana, the residents of the city, and the populist Romanus, the citizens of Rome. The residents of the city were citizens of Rome, and the citizens of Rome were the residents of the city. But by the end of the second century, Rome was by far the largest city in the Mediterranean, where other cities of the day boasted tens of thousands of citizens, Rome boasted hundreds of thousands. As the largest and most powerful city in the Mediterranean, Rome became a center of migratory gravity. Non-citizen Italians frequently moved to the growing metropolis, and were followed by Greek philosophers and Spanish artisans and North African merchants and Syrian ambassadors and Gallic mercenaries. By the 130s, Rome had transformed into a polygoth mix of every language and ethnicity in the known world. As it was with the rural peasants, the mass influx of slaves also played a dramatic role in the transformation of the urban population. Wealthy Romans purchased skilled artisans from across the Mediterranean and put them to work in the city, manufacturing goods for sale. But unlike their less skilled brethren, skilled slaves often only stayed slaves for a limited amount of time. Owners allowed a man to buy his way out of slavery and go into private business under the auspices of his former owner. These freedman clients allowed senators to engage in the kind of commercial enterprises they were supposedly forbidden from participating in. Senators used their freedmen as legal fronts to operate apartment complexes and retail shopping stalls and engage in overseas trade. Freedmen also expedited the transformation of senatorial states into commercial ventures, while allowing the senators' hands to remain clean of the grubby business of business. Unlike the mostly rural residents of Italy, the Plebserbana lived entirely on wage labor. Work was principally in retail and trade, as Rome became the great clearinghouse of Imperial trade. The docks, warehouses, and shops teamed with life every single day. Slaves worked alongside wage laborers on large public works projects, aqueducts and roads, with new projects always started as old projects were completed. Since the city of Rome was a strictly cash economy and all food, lodgings, and fuel required coins, there was never desperate poverty. If you did not have money to live, you either departed for the countryside or died in a back alley. Poverty was fatal. Politically, the Plebserbana hadn't had a collective political identity since the now ancient conflict of the orders. Although the democratic assemblies operated through the 35 tribes, all citizens' domiciled in Rome were lumped together in just four of those tribes. So though they often outnumbered all other voters at an assembly, they still only wielded four collective votes. But though their voting influence was limited, their very presence in the city made them a latent force in Roman politics. As the crisis over the Lexagraria had shown, physically controlling the assembly space was now a critical part of winning political battles. The permanent presence of the Plebserbana meant that however muted their electoral voices might be, their actual voices could be heard loud and clear, as Skipjall Emilionis discovered when they heckled him for his intemperate remarks against Tiberius Grakis. As the Plebserbana again found their political voice, they discovered they could demand aspiring politicians cater to their particular needs. Land redistribution did not particularly appeal to them. They were traders, artisans and merchants, not farmers. But what did appeal to them was the promise of a stable supply of cheap grain. Since the Plebserbana could not feed themselves, they relied on the surrounding countryside to produce the grain that kept them alive. As every budding Roman politician would learn, what the Plebserbana really wanted was food security. They were all acutely aware that the supply was susceptible to sudden shortages caused by the weather, transportation mishaps and crop failures. Or, for example, a massive slave revolt in Sicily. In the time of the Grakai, the grain that fed Rome mostly came from Sicily. Seated by the Carthaginians in 241, Sicily was the first overseas province acquired by Rome. The incredibly fertile island was an endless bounty waiting to be harvested. Roman owners flooded in, bringing with them slaves driven in droves like so many herds of cattle. The working conditions on the Sicilian estates were atrocious, as slaves were vitally beaten and scourged beyond all reason. They were also so ill-provided for that they took up banditry to survive, praying on native Sicilians who, like their cousins in Italy, were being squeezed by growing slave estates. Complaints rained in, but there were only a handful of junior Roman magistrates to administer the whole island. As long as the profits made everyone rich, there was little reason to reform the cruel system. Without hope, the Sicilian slaves began plotting rebellion. The man who emerged as the principal leader was a Syrian named Aunus. Aunus arrived in Sicily as a talkative and charismatic con artist, claiming to be a prophet and fire-breather. He charmed his masters with tales that one day he would be their king. In 135, a group of slaves approached him secretly. They wanted to kill their masters and asked the prophet Aunus for advice. The Aunus said the gods favored their plot, and soon 400 armed men put themselves under a Aunus' command. That night, they attacked the city of Anna. Contrary to his jovial promises, Aunus was not benevolent in victory. He rounded up the inhabitants of Anna, separated out skilled blacksmiths, and executed the rest. When word of the massacre spread, it sparked a general uprising. In weeks, 10,000 slaves had joined the rebellion. Aunus then fulfilled his own prophecy, placing a stolen diadem on his head. He proclaimed himself King Antiochus of Sicily. In the wake of Aunus' revolt, a second revolt erupted on the other side of the island just a few weeks later. A salician slave named Cleon heard about Aunus' rebellion and launched his own insurrection, attracting 5,000 men to his banner. One's army then overran the southern port of Agregentum and sacked it. There was some hope among the beleaguered Sicilians that the two slave armies would come into conflict and destroy each other, and were horrified when Cleon instead bent his knee to King Antiochus of Sicily. Combined, the slave armies were now unbeatable. Inside the Senate, the assumption was that this revolt would soon peter out, but every new batch of reinforcements sent to Sicily never came back. The Senate dispatched a prightower to bring the province back under control, and when he failed, they had to send another the following year. But by now, the slaves numbered some 200,000, and no Roman force appeared capable of defeating them. And it wasn't just the slaves. Many of the poor Sicilian peasants had taken to raiding wealthiest states out of a mix of greed, desperation, and revenge. Anarchy reigned. So as the Senate dealt with the Quagmire in Spain and the sudden grok and revolution, they also dealt with this ongoing Sicilian slave revolt. The Senate was frustrated by the whole affair, and were aware that out in the streets of Rome, the disruption to the food supply was making the plebs urbanate angry. With the rebellion still ongoing in the summer of 132, fully three years since the initial revolt, the Senate dispatched consul, Puplius Repilius, to Sicily. Having wrapped up his work on the anti-Grocken Tribunal, Repilius was now off to crush yet another seditious insurrection. If Repilius succeeded where other Roman commanders had failed, it was thanks to the devastation of Sicily. The insurrectionary slaves had naturally cast aside their plows, so the farms and pastors of the island went uncultivated. By the time Repilius arrived in 132, the great bread basket of Rome was barren. With conditions so grim, it was not hard for Repilius to find desperate souls inside each slave-held city to open the gates in exchange for food and leniency. When the Romans arrived at Enna, Cleon led a slave army out into the field, but Cleon himself was killed in the subsequent battle, and his army defeated. Repilius then found a willing traitor to open the gates of Enna and King Antiochus fled out the back door. The king was found hiding in a cave a few days later with, his cook, his barber, the man who rubbed him in the bath, and the jester at his banquets. Repilius tossed King Antiochus in a cell where he was consumed by lice and died. After three years, what later became known as the first servile war was over. The Senate was thrilled by the end of the slave rebellion, and coupled with the victory in Numontia and the eradication of the Grochen Menace, the noble leadership of Rome was no doubt ready to enjoy a measure of peace and quiet. But within months of the victory in Sicily, reports came in from the east that Rome had another massive provincial revolt on its hands. The embassy sent to annex the Kingdom of Pergamum, discovered that many did not want their independent Kingdom to be turned into a mere province of Rome's growing empire. For the Romans, a Proving Kai originally meant the general sphere within which a magistrate would wield authority in Rome's name. It could be a geographic area, or a military assignment, or a legal jurisdiction. But as Rome accepted its permanent imperial responsibilities, the annual Proving Kai of the various magistrates began to take on stable geographic boundaries. By 146, the Senate annually assigned magistrates to the provinces of Sicily, Sardinia, Nure and further Spain, Macedonia, and Africa. Though it was not a term used by the Romans, these provincial magistrates can reasonably be called provincial governors. In the early days of Rome's empire, a governor's work was primarily focused on military security. Political affairs were limited to securing alliances with local cities and tribes, and economic matters restricted to collecting taxes and paying for the military occupation. The administration in a province consisted of a small group of functionaries. A newly arrived prightor or consul would bring with him a household staff and an informal group of advisors called Legati drawn from among the magistrates, friends, and family. The governor was also assigned a quiet store, a young man entering public service for the first time, who would be entrusted with the provincial treasury. For some young quiet stores, this was a nerve-wracking experience, for others an opportunity to prove their virtue, and still others an opportunity for graft and bribery. Because the Roman administrative presence was so slight, provincial governors mostly relied on local leaders and existing legal and social institutions. The aristocracy of the given city were courted and co-opted, their son sent back to Rome as hostages, where they would be well treated and given a full Roman education. As a matter of practical governance, local laws, social customs, and institutions were retained. The final font of authority now simply Rome, rather than a local royal court. Though the regular administration was small and the official burdens of being a subject of the Republic Light, that did not mean being a provincial was easy to bear. Each governor arrived at the pinnacle of his career and had often taken on loads of debt to make it this far. Governing the provinces was understood to be a time to remake a man's fortunes. But an incoming governor only had so much time, and with the great wars of conquest now passed, they often resorted to extorting money from various tribes and cities in exchange for not going to war. Governors wanted to make as much money as they could before they got out. Unfortunately for the provincials, the next governor would arrive in exactly the same circumstances and the cycle would repeat. This type of abuse by the governors was often cited as a frequent cause of revolts, so in 149, just as they were annexing the central Mediterranean, the Romans established their first ever permanent court, the Quistio de Repetundis, the extortion court. The purview of the court was investigating and punishing Roman magistrates who used their power to ring unjust revenue from the provincials. But of course, jurors for the extortion court were drawn exclusively from the senatorial ranks. You can guess how often they found one of their wayward colleagues guilty. The new province of Asia was destined to become one of the most lucrative provinces in the empire, and thus a hotbed of extortion and abuse. But before the Romans could exploit their new province, they had to organize it, which was about to prove very difficult. When Scipio Nassica and his fellow senatorial ambassadors arrived in 132, they found that not everyone in Pergamum believed that they were the property of the Roman people. After King Autilus III died, a pretender to the throne named Aristonicus rejected the handover of the kingdom to Rome and claimed the crown for himself. He went around drumming up support, but most of the rich coastal cities had good relations with Rome, and there was little interest in joining a revolt. Driven into the interior, Aristonicus had better luck recruiting by promising freedom to slaves in exchange for service. Raising an army of impoverished peasants and field slaves, Aristonicus promised that after they defeated Rome, they would all be equal citizens in a free utopia he dubbed Eliopolis, the city of Sun. So just as Spain and Sicily were put to bed, the senate had to turn and deal with Asia. The command went to the new consul, and recently appointed land commissioner, Mukionus. Mukionus lobbied hard for the command, which held the promise of massive Eastern riches. But upon arrival in Asia, nothing went right. Mukionus led his legions into the mountainous interior of Anatolia, but found himself repeatedly bested by Aristonicus. In a final humiliating blow, Mukionus himself was captured by the enemy. Furious at being made a prisoner, the consul provoked his captors and blinded with a stick the barbarian who was guarding him. The guard, smarting from pain and burning with rage, stabbed him through the side with a sword. Mukionus's failure necessitated sending another consular army in 130. This army successfully besieged Aristonicus's capital and forced Eliopolis to surrender. Most of the inhabitants were either killed or re-inslaived. Aristonicus was put in chains and subsequently displayed in a triumphal parade back in Rome. When the parade ended, an executioner strangled Aristonicus to death in a prison cell. The short-lived dream of a sleeveless utopia died with him. With all these battles and sieges proceeding over months and years, it was not until 129 that the Romans finally started organizing the old kingdom of Pergamum into the new province of Asia. The Senate dispatched consul Monius Aquilius with a 10-man senatorial commission to oversee arrangements. But Aquilius turned out to be a man of questionable character. A few scattered cities still resisted Roman occupation, and not wishing to waste his time with mop-up operations, Aquilius turned to the wicked expedient of poisoning the springs to bring the last holdouts to their knees, hardly the tool of honorable conquest. But with Rome now firmly in charge, Aquilius and the new senatorial embassy settled the province of Asia. The process still dragged on, however, as the ambassadors had to demarcate the boundaries between royal property and free cities in accordance with Autelus' will. The former would become state-managed Agar-Publicus, the latter exempt from taxation. While these demarcations were being established, Aquilius took the opportunity to make a little profit on the side. Excepted bribes from neighboring kings to hand over lucrative territory as a reward for their help containing Aristonicus. In particular, Aquilius gifted the kingdom of Fregea to King Mithridadis V of Pontus, a shady transaction that would still be disputed a generation later. But with Asia finally brought into the Roman fold, the Republic was about to see yet another enormous transfer of wealth to Italy. Asia became by far the most lucrative imperial holding and delivered riches into both private and public hands, exacerbating the rising inequality that had already been undermining the stability of the Republic. History books are filled with the names of Roman military and political leaders, because those were the men Roman historians wrote about, giving the impression that every Roman was a triumph-hunting political intrigue. The plenty of wealthy Roman citizens had no interest in the lunatic jockeying for consulships and triumphs that consumed the great noble houses. And because no member of the Senate was allowed to engage in commerce, there was plenty of room for the non-political rich to take on the business of the growing empire and make huge fortunes without the pathos of high politics. The families who constituted the non-political rich of Rome were called the Equestrian class. Many of these were men with enough wealth to equip and maintain a warhorse, so they filled the ranks of Rome's early cavalry, hence the name Equestrians. But by the age of the Grogheib, the Equestrian name referred generally to the class of families worth more than 400,000 sisters. To say these families formed the middle class of Rome is technically accurate. Their fortunes fell somewhere in between the senatorial oligarchs and the mass of subsistence peasants. Equestrian fortunes were still considerable, and they were a part of the economic elite. At the intersection of private and state business was a special group of equestrians called the public honey. The republic had a variety of public obligations to fulfill, from equipping armies, to maintaining temples, to building roads and aqueducts. With senators prohibited from conducting business, someone had to handle the logistical details. The first recorded public honey contract was simple, for cure feed for the sacred geese, a special flock of birds, these superstitious Romans, believed to be favored by the gods. But by the time of the Punic Wars, the public honey handled a significant chunk of state business. With nearly 50,000 men in the legions, there was a constant demand for shoes, tunics, horses, blankets, and weapons. An order called for 6,000 togas, 30,000 tunics, and 200 new median horses to be delivered to Macedon. Someone had to arrange it. Men would buy shares in joint stock companies, and then bid on the right to fulfill a contract. As the breadth and depth of the republican empire grew, the profits to be made from state contracts were enormous. Some public honey fortunes came to surpass those of minor senators. The most lucrative contracts were for operating the state-owned mines. The first batch of state mines came under Roman control during the Punic Wars, after Rome expelled Carthage from Spain. The Romans discovered the Carthaginians had opened rich silver mines, and so claimed these mines as state-owned Aguerre publicus. Every 5 years, contracts would be auctioned off to operate the mines. And though it is difficult to calculate actual figures, the revenue involved dwarfed anything the Romans had ever handled. Conditions in these mines were awful. Deodorus describes that slaves wear out their bodies both day and night in the diggings under the earth, dying in large numbers because of the exceptional hardships they endure. For no respite or pause is granted them in their labors. But compelled beneath blows of the overseers to endure the severity of their plight, they throw away their lives in this wretched manner. The work was fatal, but the profits, astronomical. The second most lucrative contracts were for tax collection. The Roman provincial administrators did not directly collect provincial taxes. Instead, public-cony investors would form companies to buy 5-year contracts, offering a lump sum of cash in exchange for the right to go collect what was owed Rome. The amount of money a company made over the amount paid was their profit. It was a system begging to be abused because the public-cony had every incentive to extort as much as they could, even if it was more than what was legally owed. With limited oversight out in the provinces, the public-cony tax farmers soon gained a notorious reputation that wherever they went, there was neither law nor freedom. But despite this reputation for vigorous avarice, the public-cony was still the one group that could actually handle the logistical load of empire. The republic had no standing bureaucracy, so someone had to do it. The Senate was not thrilled at the rise of these public-cony corporations. Senators were themselves prohibited from participating in commercial enterprises, so they naturally considered base commerce beneath the dignity of a reputable man and distrusted the public-cony as greedy parasites. After the conquest of Macedonia in 168, the Senate intentionally withheld its extensive minds, forests and infrastructure from the public-cony. It was a deliberate attempt to block the further ascendancy of the public-cony, but it didn't last long. Five years later, the province was opened and the money started rolling in. From that point on, wherever Rome went, so too came the public-cony. And public-cony conduct in the rich province of Asia would become a special source of future conflict. While Asia was proving itself to be a major source of conflict abroad, the seeds of an even more disastrous conflict were being sewn back home, as the work of the Agrarian Commission exposed major fault lines in the social and political landscape of Italy. Italy in the second century was not a unified state, but rather a stratified confederation of cities, each with different social and political rights, depending on when and how they fell under the Roman umbrella. At the top of the citizenship hierarchy were, of course, full Roman citizens. There was no wealth requirement to be a citizen. The wealthiest senator and the poorest beggar both shared equally in the rights of citizenship, rights that collectively established their Liebertoffs or civil liberty. The most important of these liberties was the right to vote in the assembly, and protection from abuse by senior magistrates. Below the full Roman citizens in the hierarchy were the communities or individuals who held so-called Latin rights. After unilaterally annexing Latium in 338, the senate did not offer full citizenship for their new Latin citizens, but instead granted them a set of rights that allowed them to operate on a semi-equal footing with true Romans. Latins could marry, enter into contracts, and engage in land claims with a full Roman citizen. They even had the right to vote in the assembly, though the senate was not going to give too much of a voice. The Latins were collectively lumped into just one of the 35 voting tribes. Eventually, the concept of Latin rights outgrew its original ethnic origin. When Rome planted new colonies around Italy, the Roman colonists were downgraded to holding mere Latin rights in exchange for the free plot of land and place in the colony they were about to receive. Local Italians could also win Latin rights by special grant by the senate or senior Roman magistrate, often as a reward for battlefield heroics or rendering some special service to Rome. Holding Latin rights soon became a civil distinction rather than an ethnic one. Finally, at the bottom of the hierarchy were the Federati or Sochi, known collectively as the Allies. As Rome had spread across Italy, they forced defeated cities and tribes to sign mutual defense packs with Rome that required both sides to come to the others aid. But those defeated cities were never formally annexed, hence they remained merely Allies of Rome. The majority of inhabitants in Italy were Allies, with only limited civil and political rights. But as a trade-off, they also had few responsibilities. Rome demanded no regular taxes and left local administration to local magistrates. All Rome asked was that the Allies provide troops to fill the ranks of the legions. The hierarchical, confederal relationship that defined Roman Italy worked tolerably well for two centuries. It was now coming undone. By 129, only young Gaius Groccus remained of the original land commissioners. Gios had died on the capital line Hill, and his successor Mukhi Honest had been killed in Asia. Mukhi Honest's seat was filled by Marcus Fulvius Falkus, the friend of the Grocci who had helped drive the hated Nassica out of Rome. Now in his mid-30s, Falkus was gearing up for a run at the consulship when he joined the commission. Then in 129, the old prinkepsinatus Claudius died, and his seat went to Gaius Papyrius Carbo, the Tribune who had introduced the secret ballot law in 131 and clashed with Emiliano so for the legacy of Tiberius's death. Where once the Groccon faction had been run by eminent elder statesmen, it was now in the hands of young firebrands. The problem facing the new look agrarian commission was that any agar pubicists that was easy to identify and parcel out had already been identified and parcel out. All that remained was disputed property. For every disputed boundary, the commission had to undertake a thorough investigation to assess rival claims. This was a process made nearly impossible if owners could not produce deeds and if sellers could not produce receipts. Hostile ambiguity often reigned and the work of the commission slowed considerably. No boundaries created more hostility than those between Rome's agar pubicists and land owned by her Italian allies. It was nearly impossible to disentangle agar pubicists held by the senate and people of Rome from agar pubicists held by an allied city. No less than their Roman counterparts, wealthy Italians had absorbed public land onto their estates while poor shepherds relied on public land to graze their flocks. The arrival of these Roman land commissioners looking to confiscate property threatened everyone's livelihoods. But without the ability to stand for themselves in a Roman judicial proceeding, the Italians needed a Roman patron to protect their interests. They found a champion in Scipio Amelionis, now taking the stage for the final public act of his long and storied career. Amelionis's reasons for entering the fray on behalf of the Italians were varied and not wholly magnanimous. First, it would boost his own prestige enormously. His aristocratic disdain for the fate of Tiberius had estranged him from the populace of Rome, so he now positioned himself to broaden his base of political support. Second, by pushing back against land commission, Amelionis hoped to reconcile with his colleagues in the senate. He had spent his life thumbing his nose at their traditions, but Amelionis would earn back much good will if he killed the despised land commission. Finally, there may have been a collective desire on the part of the senate to at least appear to take the complaints of the Italians seriously. All integration of Italy was not with the senate desired, but by positioning themselves as sympathetic to the Italians, they might buy enough support to permanently avoid calls for more drastic reform. In 129, Amelionis delivered a speech in the senate arguing that the commissioners were violating treaties, and that because borders with allied land was a matter of foreign policy and not domestic affairs, disputes between the commission and the Italians should be arbitrated by a consul. The senate agreed and passed a decree supporting Amelionis' recommendation. This decree did not have the literal force of law, but now that the land commission was run by three relatively junior politicians, the weight of the senate's opinion prevailed. But by now, nearly all available land bordered Italian property, so the senateorial decree brought the work of the land commission to a grinding halt. The commission was not formally abolished, but its ability to act was fatally curtailed. Amelionis then moved the debate into the forum, where he held forth in front of the crowds, laying the groundwork for either significantly amending or outright repealing the lexagraria. But he was, once again, greeted by the plebsurbanah, who were angry he was taking the side of the Italians. Amelionis went out that Amelionis was determined to abolish the law of Grocchus utterly, and for that end was about to inaugurate armed strife and bloodshed. Soon the already hostile mob turned very hostile, and men started shouting, kill the tyrant. But Amelionis stood his ground and said, Very naturally those who feel hostile towards our country wished to make a way with me first, for it is not possible for Rome to fall while Scipio stands, nor for Scipio to live when Rome has fallen. But though he all but dared the mob to attack, they did not. And Amelionis's friends escorted him home after the meeting had adjourned. After his friends saw him safely home, Amelionis told them that he planned to spend the evening working on a major speech that he would deliver the following day. But the next morning, Amelionis failed to emerge from his house. Concerned friends soon found his lifeless body in his bed. Only 56 years old, and still in the prime of his political life, Scipio Amelionis was dead. Given the atmosphere that surrounded his sudden death, it would have been impossible not to suspect foul play. And over the years, the list of suspects has included the entire Grocchi family. Dias, his sister-synpronia, and their mother Cornelia, Afrikanah. All three had good reason to now consider their erstwhile kin and enemy. But also suspected were the two other land commissioners, Flakis and Carbo, both of whom had clashed with Amelionis in the past. But for whatever reason, the Senate did not care to pry too deeply into the affair. Great man, though, Amelionis was, no inquest was held concerning the manner of his death. It may well be that Amelionis's death was natural, and that the timing of his demise mere coincidence, we will never know. The storied and controversial career of Publius Scipio Amelionis created a template for future generations of Romans to emulate. He embodied a new spirit of what it meant to be Roman. He embraced Greek philosophy and was comfortable in luxurious surroundings. This new breed of Roman nobiles detested old scolds like Cato the Elder, and they saw no reason to reject good wine and elegant conversation. As the years progressed, the world view of the Scipione Circle would take over the upper classifs who were soon sending their sons to be educated in Athens as a matter of course. Amelionis even introduced the habit of shaving one's face daily, which became standard custom of the Roman aristocracy for the next 300 years. On the political front, Amelionis figured out how to use the assembly to bypass inconvenient hurdles. He had held two consulships in his career, both secured after special dispensation from an assembly. As consul, he fought two great wars, both assigned by a special vote of the assembly, rather than by traditional drawing of lots. It was a powerful example that would be used by all future dynasties of the late republic. The assembly was incredibly powerful. The people's unified voice could override everything, a man who controlled the assembly, but do anything he wanted. Amelionis also said a dangerous example when he used his extensive client network to raise a personal legion. In an age racked by fights over conscription, Amelionis had no trouble raising men to go conquer Numontia. He was able to call in favors and obligations from across the Mediterranean that raised fully 60,000 troops. Amelionis was living proof of what a charismatic and well-connected general could do. Marius, Sulla, and Caesar all followed Amelionis' basic principles of operations. Raise a personal army and then use the assembly to legislate your opponents into oblivion. But though his career pointed to the future, Amelionis himself departed this world as an anachronism, the future would not be defined by noble princes who ruled the world by day and debated Greek philosophy at night. Instead, it would be driven by a harder set of men, publicani merchants steering the empire toward their own profits, poor farmers squeezed off their land. Urban artisans dealing with recurring grain shortages, Italian allies frustrated with their lack of civil rights, slaves by the thousands constantly on the verge of revolt. The next generation would be defined by men who would attempt to harness these forces to control the Republic. But as Amelionis himself noted, those who make themselves up for political competition or the race for glory as actors do for the stage must necessarily regret their action, since they must either serve those who may think they should rule or offend those who may wish to please.